Durban - KwaZulu Natal Health MEC Sibongiseni Dlomo announced plans to build a new King Edward VIII Hospital and Medical School at a press briefing at Truro House in Durban on Monday.
 Dlomo made the announcement during a progress report of the renovations to King Edward Hospital after it was damaged by a massive storm in October last year.

“There are big plans to build a new King Edward VIII Hospital and Medical School at a site in Cato Manor. But that is a project of the National Department of Health and the Department of Higher Education, which will unfold with time,” said Dlomo.
 The MEC also announced that the department is in the process of finalising the appointment of the hospital’s new CEO.
 “We have full confidence in his abilities and have no doubt that he will manage this very important strategic health institution well for us,” said Dlomo.

The CEO who was not named will start his duties at the beginning of 2019.
Dlomo said the estimated cost to repair King Edward is R100 million which is funded by  KZN Department of Health and KZN treasury.
Several key wards including theatres, the S Block - which accommodates about 200 beds- and the roofs of several units and wards were damaged.

“The asbestos roofs have been replaced in the theatre complex, S-Block and one of the two maternity wards,” said Dlomo.
He said there is a revitalisation project involving the demolition and reconstruction of the neonatal unit; and plans to redesign theatres as well as the S-Block are being finalised.
“Construction in surgical wards are expected to be completed in December 2018 while theatres are expected to be finalised in February 2019. ICU and High Care are expected to be finalised in April 2019,” said Dlomo.

Dlomo added that in about seven months the brand new 500-bed Dr Pixley Ka Isaka Seme Memorial hospital will open its doors.
“The R2.5bn level 2 regional hospital is now 81% complete. We have already begun fitting equipment,” said Dlomo.
Since the construction of the hospital in 2015 said Dlomo, 1802 people have been employed including 1167 locals, 163 women, 986 youth and two disabled. 

He said many more job opportunities will be created.
“We wish to warn the public that all posts will be advertised in reputable newspapers and official government online platforms,”he said.
Dlomo urged the people of KZN not to fall for fraudulent adverts circulated on whatsapp and social media which ask them to pay for posts.

“No government post is paid for,” he said.
The Mercury