Durban - A bleak festive season awaits a community of police and others who live in a deteriorating 17-storey block of police flats between North Beach and the railway tracks leading out of Durban station as they fear being evicted on Christmas Eve.
The SA Police Union (Sapu) is taking up the plight of the police members involved because police management has not offered them alternative accommodation, said provincial secretary Nurse Mdletshe.

“They are acting contrary to the Constitution,” she said.
“We have told our members to just stay there.”
Mdletshe said police management had not been willing to enter discussions. She suspects there is an agenda to change it into a provincial headquarters. Management has said the flats need to be renovated, she said.

At least 35 tenants were police officers, she added. Over the years, other tenants had filtered into the building through “gaps” in the system.
Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said not even residents who were active members of the service were allowed to live at Natalia Court.
“Some members are retired, resigned or have been dismissed,” said Zwane.

“Others have outstayed their occupation period in accordance to the Housing Policy and refuse to move out. Others have taken possession without the proper authorisation.”
He went on to say that the building was not in a suitable condition for human occupation and was a danger to every person who lived there.
“The state is under no obligation to provide them with housing and the onus of provision of housing remains the responsibility of each member.

“To ensure the safety of members the SAPS is endeavouring to vacate them.”
A policeman who spoke to the Independent on Saturday on condition of anonymity said this was affecting police “of good standing”.
“We have a community here. The children attend local schools. We don’t know where they will be able to go if we all have to move. And there are police here, of good standing, who have lived here their whole careers.

“We would be willing to pay a reasonable price for alternative accommodation but they want to chase us away like dogs.”
He acknowledged that in recent years there had been a lack of maintenance.
“There were some gaps. People from the street - not police - ended up getting access. We chased them out and made renovations to make our flats homes.”

Adding to their woes has been an erratic water supply over the past six months.
Residents said they kept taps on permanently and, at whatever time, when they heard them come on again, filled up several containers with water.
Zwane said: “With regard to the erratic delivery of water, this is owing to illegal connections by some members themselves.”

Independent On Saturday