Durban - As part of Durban’s Tourism Visitor Marketing Strategy, eThekweni mayor Zandile Gumede gears up to launch multi million rand tourist Riksha buses at Suncoast Sundeck-Promenade on Wednesday.
eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede says under her leadership she wants to see Durban increasing its market share of tourists dramatically in all season of the year.

“We are a city hard at work. Tourists that come to our city should automatically be our ambassador when they are gone back home. We will only do that by ensuring that we unceasingly meet their needs.
The Municipality has taken delivery of the multi million Riksha buses that will be ferrying tourists around the city. 
In a statement released on Tuesday, the municipality said tourism is a major contributor in the city’s economy and with summer vacations looming on the horizon, the municipality is pulling all the stops to look after the welfare of all its tourists.

Gumede said hopping on the Ricksha Bus is the most convenient way for them to explore the City’s Tourism offerings. 
“One is able to see scenic overviews of a range of Durban’s Major Attractions, while learning about the City’s history, its people and their heritage, cultural diversity and many more. It is going to be an experience that will forever be engraved in the minds of many of our tourists we are very excited,” said Gumede.
This is part of Durban Tourism Visitor Marketing Strategy which put more emphasis on the importance of dispersing visitors to all parts of the city, including Townships and rural areas to enhance a total experience for a visitor and ensure the spread of tourism benefits to all eThekwini residents.

Three new routes will be covered by the buses with include three more regions of the city with more emphasis on township and rural tourism. 
North Beach Tourism office will be the official departure point for all bus tours. 
New routes include South Coastal, North Coastal and North Inland, Western Routes and Additional nodes in the Central routes at an estimation of 3 – 5 hours each. 

The Mercury