Durban - A local government spokesperson has been hailed as a hero on social media after she came to the rescue of a man who crashed his car near Ashburton on the way to Pietermaritzburg on Wednesday. 
 

 Ncumisa Ndelu - the spokesperson for Social Development MEC Weziwe Thusi - did not think twice about pulling over in the rain and running to help a disorientated driver who only seconds earlier had rolled across the highway in his Nissan Navara.
Ndelu, who was on her way to work around 8.30am, said the 21-year-old man was driving in front of her when “he did something I have never seen”.

“He literally just went straight for the hill on the left, drove up and then came rolling down onto the highway before landing in the middle lane. I did my best to avoid him and pulled over in the emergency lane,” Ndelu said. 

She said when she looked back she saw the man out of the car and walking aimlessly on the highway . 

“I had to get him out of further danger so I grabbed him and let him sit in my car while I called the police,” she said. 

After reporting the accident to the police, she asked the man for his mother’s contact number. 

“He said his mother had died in July. I had to take a moment because I lost my mother recently. I felt for this boy, so I couldn’t leave him,” she said. 

Eventually, she phoned a relative of his to inform her of the incident and which hospital she could take him to. 

“What made the situation worse was that people could see there were no officers there to control traffic, but they were slowing down to stare and take photos. 

“I posted my story on Facebook because I hope people learn that there is more to life than you and your phone. I mean, people just stopped long enough to take a picture and continued driving. Only one man stopped to check if we needed assistance,” Ndelu said. 

She then told the ambulance service to take the man to Medi-Clinic hospital in Pietermaritzburg where his family would meet him. 

“I’m a mother of two girls and always say I hope someone will help my children if I am unable to be there for them,” she said. 

The Mercury