DURBAN - Netflix South Africa is offering users of the streaming service a new package according to MyBroadband. 
 

 The Ultra package is above the Premium package and has replaced the Premium package as the top package available to users. 

 

 According to the Netflix page, the Ultra package costs R239. 
Related ArticlesGift your firends or family with a Netflix giftcardNetflix plans to make 17 more original productions in AsiaNetflix to test lower-price plans as it seeks more Asian usersTelkom confirms Netflix partnershipGift your firends or family with a Netflix giftcardNetflix plans to make 17 more original productions in AsiaNetflix to test lower-price plans as it seeks more Asian usersTelkom confirms Netflix partnership12
 

 The below table shows the costs of the different Netflix packages:

 

  .tg {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;border-color:#aabcfe;} .tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:0px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:#aabcfe;color:#669;background-color:#e8edff;} .tg th{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:0px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:#aabcfe;color:#039;background-color:#b9c9fe;} .tg .tg-s268{text-align:left}  
  
  
    
    Netflix package 
    Price 
    
    
    Basic 
    R99 
    
    
    Standard 
    R139 
    
    
    Premium 
    R169 
    
    
    Ultra 
    R239 
    
  
 
 

 The only difference between the Premium and the Ultra packages is that Ultra offers a new feature called Highest Quality Audio. 

 

 According to MyBroadband, the Ultra package has been added as a part of a test of various price points to better understand how consumers value the streaming service. 

 

 The new highest quality audio feature will offer a slightly higher bitrate to supported devices which will produce a more engaging sound if network conditions permit. 

 

 Mobile only

 

 Netflix is testing a lower-priced mobile-only subscription according to TechCrunch. The mobile-only subscription is aimed at increasing their appeal in Asia. 

 

 In an interview with Bloomberg, Chief Executive of the company told Bloomberg that Netflix would test lower-priced packages. 

 

 The new service is available in Malaysia with a price tag of $4 (R57.12). According to a spokesperson for the company, the new service is being trialled in Malaysia and a few other countries. 

 

 Follow the Business Report on Instagram here

 

 BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE