Durban - PHUMELELE Ngcobo sent her son to live in a children’s home because she hoped he would have a better life.
Instead, he ended up one of eight boys who burnt to death when a cottage they lived in caught fire.

The boys aged between eight and 21 were sleeping at the Lakehaven Child and Youth Care Centre when the fire broke out in 2016.
This week, a report which was tabled in the provincial legislature social development portfolio committee, revealed that the facility was a death trap waiting to happen.
Of the 30 standards required for compliance, the facility met two.

It was partially compliant with 17 standards and non-compliant with 11.
An unemployed Ngcobo, 43, who lives in a mud house in Ndwedwe, said it was a difficult decision sending her son to Lakehaven. But, her circumstances forced her to do so. When Minenhle died, he was in Grade 12.
“He was a very smart boy. He was my last hope. When he realised that I was struggling, he comforted me.

“He told me that once he became a teacher, he would look after me. He told me poverty would be the last thing that would affect me and his siblings. But he died before he could fulfil his dreams,” Ngcobo said.
The Mbambo family whose son, Gabriel, died in the fire, also have their regrets. His mother, Eunice, 47, said the centre should have been a safer environment than the one she could provide.
“The social worker took him away and said he was neglected and not safe at home.

“However the place that was supposed to have been safer than his home killed him,” said Mbambo.
The investigation also found the centre kept children for more than six months which was against the regulations.
Rajen Pillay, the president of the Child Welfare Durban and District (CWDD), which has oversight over Lakehaven, said the investigation did not take into consideration that the centre was built long before changes were made to the standards set out in the Children’s Act of 2005.

“You must also understand that the facilities where the children are housed at Lakehaven are individual cottages. They were built like that.
“Now the norms and standards have changed drastically in terms of the Children’s Act, which I fully support and agree with,” Pillay said.
He claimed they were excluded during the investigation.

Pillay said the manager in charge of the facility at the time of the incident was interviewed on the last day she left the facility last year.
A caregiver who was in the cottage and managed to get 10 boys to safety, resigned after the incident.
“What was of concern to me, which I addressed in the meeting with the MEC, was that the findings were released over two years after the tragedy.

“So it becomes very subjective when an investigation is conducted in that manner,” said Pillay.
He said after the incident, the organisation was proactive and addressed gaps.
Ncumisa Ndelu, the spokesperson for Social Development MEC, Weziwe Thusi, said the department would be meeting with the families soon.

“In the meeting with the MEC they (the board) appreciated the investigation which was quite extensive and thorough.
“They accepted the findings and committed to coming up with a turnaround strategy,” said Ndelu.
Pillay said the cause of the fire was still unknown.

Sunday Tribune