Durban - Five contractors who were part of the orange bag recycling programme have taken the eThekwini Municipality to court to force the city to provide them with millions of these bags.
In their court application, the contractors say not getting the recycling bags is blocking them from continuing with the recycling project. They have warned that this would affect residents and especially the municipality negatively during the festive season when the amount of household waste increases.

The contractors claim they have suffered financial prejudice due to the municipality’s failure to supply them with the bags.
“Over and above that, the citizens of the whole respondent (the municipality) are being prejudiced because they are paying for a service which they are not receiving,” the companies claim.
The High Court application is the latest in the orange bag recycling programme saga which has made headlines this year following the leaking of a forensic investigation report. It revealed that a R90million tender for the supply of these bags had been improperly awarded in 2015 to a company which allegedly lacked the expertise to produce the bags.

President Cyril Ramaphosa recently authorised an investigation into the matter by the Special Investigating Unit (SIU).
Pat Recycling, Power Rush Trading 209 CC, Best To Recycle Ltd, Silver Jupiter Investments and KZN Frasha filed papers in the Durban High Court last week seeking to compel the city to supply them with a combined 14900 bales of the orange bags and 22350 bales of clear recycling bags.
As there are 450 bags in each bale of orange plastic bags and 200 bags in a bale of clear bags, this translates to a demand of 6.7 million orange bags and 4.4 million clear bags.

In their application, they claim that following the COP17 conference on climate change, the municipality had encouraged “wider communities to support a recycling venture in which small businesses were to be involved”.
As part of the project, the small businesses were expected to collect the recyclables from homes and, subject to subsidies from the municipality, sell these to recycling companies.
The contractors say that at the beginning of the project, they would collect the orange bags from households, thereafter send them to Mondi, which at the time was the only processing company which was involved in the project. 

They were paid by Mondi per ton but over and above this the municipality would pay the contractors 10% of whatever amount had been paid by Mondi.
However, in 2017 Mondi withdrew its support for the project, but there were other processing companies that were by that time also involved.
The contractors say these processing companies were not prepared to sift through the waste, meaning they now had to hire staff and premises at which the sifting took place.

After the award of the alleged irregular tender for the supply of orange bags, the contractors started experiencing problems receiving the orange bags and they say they have been incurring costs ever since.
In 2015, the municipality introduced the clear plastic bags which were meant to contain glass and cans.
Later in 2016 when there were problems with the supply of orange bags, residents were given two clear bags and told to put cardboard and paper in the one bag and glass and cans in the other.

“Householders, however, became resistant to and less compliant with the scheme. They started mixing waste indiscriminately between the clear bags and eventually many householders simply put their recyclable materials in their black bags.”
This meant less recyclables were reaching the contractors and less recyclables reached the processing companies.
Many of them, they say, started experiencing higher operating costs.The contractors say in March this year, after they had written to the city, the supply of the bags resumed only to stop again in July. 

They detail how they have been trying to engage with the municipality but have received no joy, forcing them to approach the court.
Asked if the municipality will be opposing the application, spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the city cannot comment on the matter as it was before the court. “The City views recycling as an extremely vital initiative in protecting and sustaining the environment. Residents are encouraged to continue with the initiative over and above the challenges that the project is facing,” Mayisela said.
He said the city was using internal resources to collect the orange bags and urged residents to take out their recyclables on the same days they took out their normal refuse.

The Mercury