Durban - The month of November is dedicated to creating awareness about prostate and testicular cancers. 
It's that time of the year when most men ditch the razor or clippers and grow their mo (moustache) in order to raise awareness for often lesser talked about illnesses. It's also known as Movember.


Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men worldwide. Men who are of African or Caribbean descent, and men who have a family history (a brother or father with prostate cancer), are 2.5x more likely to get prostate cancer.

 


Testicular cancer is the most common cancer in young men aged 15 – 39. Men with undescended testes at birth, or who have a family history, like a father or brother who has had testicular cancer, are at an increased risk. And if you’ve had testicular cancer before, there’s also a heightened risk it could return.

 


What is prostate cancer?
Prostate cancer occurs when some of the cells in the prostate reproduce far more rapidly than normal, resulting in a tumour. Prostate cancer often grows slowly to start with and may never cause any problems. But some men have prostate cancer that is more likely to spread. These prostate cancer cells, if left untreated, may spread from the prostate and invade distant parts of the body, particularly the lymph nodes and bones, producing secondary tumours in a process known as metastasis.

How to detect prostate cancer?
Not everyone experiences symptoms of prostate cancer. Many times, signs of prostate cancer are first detected by a doctor during a routine check-up. Some men, however, will experience changes in urinary or sexual function that might indicate the presence of prostate cancer.
Signs and symptoms



 A need to urinate frequently, especially at night
 Difficulty starting urination or holding back urine
 Weak or interrupted flow of urine
 Painful or burning urination
 Difficulty in having an erection
 Painful ejaculation
 Blood in urine or semen
 Frequent pain or stiffness in the lower back, hips, or upper thighs
 Treating prostate cancer
 Treatment options are many and varied. Testing still can’t answer lots of key questions about disease aggression, prognosis and progression.
 If you have been diagnosed with prostate cancer, it's important to keep in mind that many prostate cancers are slow growing and may not need surgery or other radical treatment.



Treatment options include:


 Active Surveillance
 Prostatectomy
 Radiotherapy
 Hormone Therapy
 Chemotherapy


What is testicular cancer?
Testicles are responsible for the production of male hormones (mostly testosterone) and sperm. Testicular cancer starts as an abnormal growth or tumour that develops in one or both testicles. There are several types of testicular cancer, but the most common is the germ cell tumour.

How can testicular cancer be treated?
Testicular cancer is a highly treatable cancer and can be effectively treated, and often cured, if diagnosed and treated early. Advanced testicular cancer can also be cured with treatment including:


 Orchiectomy (surgical removal of the affected testis), done under general anesthetic
 Chemotherapy or radiotherapy, often prescribed after surgery to treat any remaining cancer cells that may have spread to other parts of the body, such as lymph nodes.
For more information, log onto https://za.movember.com/get-involved/move


 
 
  Source: Movember SA website
 


The Mercury