Durban - The silly season has officially begun. From now till the New Year you can expect less work being done and more noise being made. Particularly in the form of fireworks.  
It’s the ‘f’ word pet parents dread, and one that unfortunately comes around every year. 

“If you have an anxious pet, it’s important to know what you can do to relieve the stress they may feel,” said nutritional advisor at Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Dr Guy Fyvie.
The use of fireworks is regulated by South African bylaws under the Explosives Act, 1956, which states, among other things, that no fireworks should be set off, detonated or exploded within 200m of any hospital, clinic, petrol station, old-age home or nursing home, or animal welfare organisation or institution, and that using fireworks to frighten pets is against the law. 
“However, even if the fireworks display is a fair distance from your home, dogs and cats’ hearing is far sharper and much more sensitive than ours, and the noise could still trigger an anxious reaction,”Fyvie said.

Fyvie recommended that pet parents look out for the following signs of anxious behaviour:


 Hiding away
 Bowel and bladder accidents
 Excessive panting
 Inability to settle down
 Shaking
 Yawning
 Excessive licking or chewing
 Attempting to escape their environment 
 Barking and howling more excessively than usual

 Ways to keep your pets calm:




 Keep familiar noises or sounds playing in the house such as the TV and some background music. The more it seems like an everyday, normal situation, the better.
 Close curtains so the flash of the fireworks isn’t visible.
 Create a comfortable, smaller, space in the house for your dog or cat to retreat to when they’re feeling anxious. As a distraction from the loud noise, provide them with a tasty chew toy.
 Keep outside noises at bay by keeping the windows and doors in the house closed.
 For outdoor cats who come and go as they please, rather place a litter tray inside and close the doors and the cat flap, so they can’t go outside that evening.
 If you can’t stay at home with your pets, make sure someone else they trust is there to calm and reassure them – the less changes during this time the better.
 Ask your veterinarian about specially formulated foods which help alleviate stress such as * Hill's Prescription Diet i/d Stress for dogs and Hill's Prescription Diet c/d Stress for cats. For severe cases, they may recommend certain medication.


"If you’re anticipating a stressful event, such as fireworks or even holiday kennels, it’s recommended you transition your pet onto a stress-reducing food four weeks beforehand. However, many pet parents have reported positive results as early as a few days. If your pet is a nervous type you can consider this food for long term feeding," Fyvie said. 

The Mercury