Durban - The provincial legislature has warned government departments to rein in their spending because the province is cash-strapped and cannot afford to bail out departments that have overspent.
The mid-term budget hearings conducted by KwaZulu-Natal’s finance portfolio committee revealed that the province faced projected over-expenditure of almost R1.2billion for the 2018/19 financial year and had around R160million in contingency reserves.

The committee has demanded turn- around strategies, tighter spending and management controls. It said these must be presented monthly to the portfolio committees of the respective departments.
The Health Department is among the culprits, with projected overspending of more than R500m. 
The Transport Department is expected to be next, coming in at R200m over budget.

A serial offender for overspending in past financial years, the Education Department surprised committee members by reporting it had rescued its finances and was only projecting overspending of about R1.2m. 
“Of the 15 government departments, nine have projected over-expenditure, and of those only health does not have a clear plan on how to pull back from the over-expenditure. 
“Previously, when the departments had overspent, the legislature approved the provincial government paying those funds, but that is not going to happen this time. The provincial kitty is almost empty,” said finance committee chairperson Sipho Nkosi.

Nkosi said they believed the departments should re-prioritise their budgets because it seemed they had failed to plan properly. He said the committee would not accept cuts that might compromise service delivery. 
DA committee member Francois Rodgers said his party had warned for some time of a looming financial crash as the fiscal noose tightened. 
“We welcome the committee’s adoption of a proposal that all departments will now submit cash-flow projections, monthly expenditure analyses and a turnaround strategy to their respective portfolio committees.” 

He said KwaZulu-Natal could ill-­afford to start raising funds to sustain service delivery, resulting in interest charges that would only further affect already poor service delivery. 
The Mercury