Durban - The end of the year is notoriously expensive and with festive gifts, entertainment, holidays, and celebrations to pay for, it’s no wonder most South Africans find themselves financially limping through January.
Chief Marketing Officer at Wonga South Africa, Taryn Schmidt, said it has been a long year and while we may think it is time to spoil ourselves and our loved ones, this could be costly. 

"If you are smart about it, having a fantastic festive season will not have you starting 2019 on a bad financial note," she said. 
Tips on how you can secure your finances and still have a lit festive season.  
Plan and be a smart gift giver - Generosity is a fantastic quality, but too much can have us forfeiting our own wellbeing in favour of another’s. When it comes to the giving of gifts, it pays to be smart. Make a list of the people you plan on buying gifts for, then decide on your total budget and how much you can afford to spend on each person.  Instead of buying the first expensive thing that catches your eye, put a little thought and effort into the gifts. Do some research and compare prices online to come up with affordable gift ideas and ensure you’re getting the best price. 

Start your holiday shopping early - The earlier you start looking for presents, the more time you’ll have to shop discerningly. You’ll also spread the cost out over an extra month, which will be an enormous relief to your December finances. Don’t wait until the week before Christmas to buy all your gifts, you’ll miss out on all the best deals and end up spending far more money than you intended to as you scurry to get your shopping done in time.
Renegotiate your insurance policies - People often sign up for insurance and then leave their policies in place for years without review. In the meantime, your premiums increase, while the value of some of your possessions are likely to go down. Also, if you want to upgrade or downgrade your medical aid in the new year, changes often have to be made before the end of the year. To save money going into the festive season, review your insurance coverage and do a little research by comparing your policies to at least three different providers. You could find yourself reducing your policies by hundreds of rands each month.
Spread the festive responsibility - From going away on holiday to buying gifts and hosting celebrations, there might be opportunities to share the financial burden this summer. Friends and family can contribute to entertainment costs, petrol on road trips, holiday accommodation costs and even club together to buy combined Christmas gifts. As well as alleviating, some of the financial strain this also means you’ll have even more time to spend with the ones you love this holiday.

Consolidate unused bank accounts - Do you have savings or investment accounts standing empty, or credit cards you’re trying to avoid using? Close off those old accounts that you’re no longer using, especially if they’re costing you monthly fees. Also, close off credit card accounts you can do without, thereby reducing the temptation to land yourself in fresh debt in the New Year.
The Mercury