Durban - The  eThekwini Municipality says it is doing its best to maintain the city’s cemeteries, but admits they are battling vandalism, vagrancy and litter.
This is according to municipal spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela, who was speaking to The Mercury after councillors raised concerns about the state of graveyards in their wards. 

Councillor Martin Meyer said the Hime Road cemetery, just off Umgeni Road, was very old and the area was unsafe.
The cemetery has also not had burials for some years.
“Structures are dilapidated and it is a haven for vagrants. There is a big mausoleum and at one stage there were people actually living inside the structure. It is a big concern for residents living nearby.

“We replaced the gates but after a few days, those gates were stolen. When we addressed this with the municipality, they told us that because there are no visitors to this cemetery, they cannot employ security. 
“This site needs to be secured as it cannot be sold or have anything built over it,” he said. 
Mayisela said the city had applied for a permit through KwaZulu-Natal heritage conservation agency Amafa to demolish the building there. 

Another cemetery under the spotlight was the Stellawood Cemetery in Glenwood. Ward councillor Mmabatho Tembe said the cemetery had an abandoned building that attracted vagrants and drug users. 

 


“They enter through the gate, which is not closed, and there is a wall that was damaged after rains. The wall has not been fixed, even after numerous calls and emails for updates,” she said. 
Tembe said there was also a problem with illegal dumping at the cemetery and light poles had been cut. 

“People have been burning fires in the cemetery. They are burning waste. I have reported this to the municipality, but to no avail. All I am told is that they will look into it, but there are no concrete plans,” Tembe said. 
Concern was also raised about the cemetery in the CBD, in particular where buildings and structures had been damaged. 
Mayisela said the city had teams that regularly inspected the cemeteries. 

“This includes repairing fencing, security guards on site and access control measures. Our security guards and law enforcement officials patrol and enforce by-laws daily, while staff clean and cut the grass at these facilities.
He said the city had also applied to have the old Anglican chapel at the Durban central cemetery demolished. 
“The chapel cannot be demolished or renovated as it is privately owned by the Anglican church. They have been notified and appraised about the state of the chapel and they are not willing to demolish it.

“This is why we applied through Amafa to demolish the building. The process has been ongoing since 2015. We will follow up on the process and if we are granted permission, it will be demolished,” he said. 
Meanwhile, at Stellawood cemetery, Mayisela said the city had submitted recommendations to add four security guards to the site to resolve the security issues. 
“We are still awaiting new financial year allocations,” he said.

The Mercury