Durban - The Richmond Municipality has ground to a halt with workers abandoning work in fear of their lives, and the public unable to access services.
Key services such as the municipal traffic office have allegedly been closed since Monday.

Municipal vehicles have been used to block access to several council buildings, including the traffic department.
The council is embroiled in a bitter dispute with municipal manager Bongiwe Mnikathi. 
The feud, which has pitted employees against Mnikathi and the council, has been going on for months. 

The council suspended her earlier this month, but she obtained a court interdict on Friday that ordered that her suspension be lifted and that she be allowed to return to work. 
It is believed the court order prompted workers to abandon their stations.
Speaker Samora Ndlovu and deputy mayor Khonziwe Mkhize held a terse meeting with officials from the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) about the crisis yesterday. 

 A source close to the municipality said: “We are not even sure how they will resolve this because they have failed before. As things stand, nothing is moving in the council.” 
Another said the council had been captured, and that while Mnikathi wanted “things done the right way, there are councillors who want money for projects directed to their mouths”. 
Mandlenkosi Shelembe, the chairperson of the SA Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) in Richmond, said the workers did not feel safe.

“There are people (guarding Mnikathi) who walk around the council building with big guns, like they are in a troop camp. They are intimidating and demanding to know where employees live.
“We decided people should stop coming to work because they are not safe,” he said.
DA councillor Goodman Madonda said Cogta needed to investigate the council. 

“The community is suffering. People cannot even pay for licences because those offices have been blocked.” 
He said the environment was toxic and would generate problems.
Mnikathi said she was investigating the officials who used municipal vehicles to block council entrances. 

“No labour dispute has been declared. What they’ve done is wrong.”
She said she would not speak about the allegations regarding her bodyguards because they were not interfering with anyone. 
Ndlovu said they had been interdicted from taking any action against Mnikathi pending the intervention by Cogta, whose spokesperson, Lennox Mabaso, said MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube had issued the municipality with an ultimatum to get things in order.

The Mercury