Durban - Four of the city’s oldest buildings, including the iconic Durban City Hall, are so dilapidated that they will need hundreds of millions of rand to fix.
This has prompted a few councillors to propose selling some of them.

An assessment by independent assessors on the buildings shows that the city needs R645 million to fix the buildings and of this, the City Hall will require R322m.
The other three buildings are Metro Police headquarters, Rennie House and 75 Dr Langalibalele (Winder) Street. 
The report tabled before the executive committee notes that City Hall, built more than 100 years ago, “requires significant construction work to reach a state of functionality”.

The building’s heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) and electrical systems were also found wanting, with the assessors saying these were “seriously affected” by the “ad-hoc and unco-ordinated” construction works.
“The various systems are not compatible, inefficient and do not serve the intended buildings functions,” the assessors found.
The electrical installation at the City Hall, the report states further, is experiencing strain due to a “patchwork” approach to upgrades.

One of the immediate interventions needed at City Hall is the repair of the roof structure which is “compromised by the presence of wood-eating insects”.
Damage to the interior has been attributed to “service providers undertaking work while not familiar with the intricacies of working on a heritage structure”.
The team of assessors, comprised of an architect, a quantity surveyor and electrical, mechanical and structural engineers, found 75 Dr Langalibalele Street, which houses the city’s real estate unit, to be in a “state of disrepair” and in need of work estimated at R197m. 

The building’s HVAC system was found not to comply with the National Fire Protection Association regulations and that there is a risk of parapet flashings being blown off the roof onto the street below.
Regarding the Metro Police Department’s headquarters, the assessors concluded that the headquarter’s operative functions were “compromised by the current state of the building and that urgent intervention and long term enhancement projects need to be undertaken”. 
Some of the work needed at the building included the relocation of the telecommunications tower as it was found to be resulting in a long-term impairment of the building.

The gym, it was recommended, also needed to be moved as it was in an area not suited to its stress loads.
Interior damage at the Metro Police Department building was largely caused by poor maintenance. 
Rennie House was found to be in a reasonable state and required no immediate intervention. 

“This is not to say that no repair/ restorative works are required but these works can be carried out according to the municipal maintenance schedules.”
Reacting to the report, the ANC’s Mondli Mthembu said the urgent repair work should be attended to first and this would mean the costs were not as exorbitant as they seemed.
He said the report commissioned by the city was a result of a proactive stance.

“I think we are on the right track and the focus now should be on the immediate interventions. Discussion must continue on whether it would be viable for the city to keep on holding on to that building at 75 Langalibalele, given the cost,” Mthembu said.
Heinz de Boer of the DA said one of the solutions the city could explore was to sell the buildings.
“If we had to take these buildings, sell them and get R500m, we could spend that on patching the buildings and build the council chamber and municipal offices. You would essentially have a new building, municipal complex and chamber for the same amount you spend on just patching them up.”

He said City Hall was problematic, hard to maintain and could be turned into something else.
“We certainly don’t have R322m to fix it. It is a beautiful building, but potentially we need to start thinking of moving out of it in the medium term and making it something else - whether a museum or library.”
The Mercury