Durban - THE DA wants Durban to allow boom gates, security huts and private security street patrols in a bid to curb crime.
According to the city’s by-laws, these are illegal, and many communities have been warned against installing them. 

In a motion brought by Durban North ward councillor, Shaun Ryley, the DA requested the committee to investigate and consider drafting an official policy on privately funded security measures in neighbourhoods. 
This would include installation of security huts, boom gates and security guards conducting streets patrols in compliance with the constitution, the notice said. 
But most members of the council voted against the motion, and no reasons were given. 

Ryley said residents were willing to put their own money into these efforts and the city should have agreed, but instead, the council played politics.
According to recent crime statistics, house robberies in Durban North and other suburbs have doubled in the past financial year, and business robberies have increased by 150%. 
Ryley said that as violent crime escalated across the country, many communities within eThekwini were constantly looking for ways to strengthen safety and security in their neighbourhoods at their own expense. 

“Such measures have the potential to supplement the efforts of SAPS and metro police in fulfilling their crime prevention responsibilities. 
“However, confusion exists around what is permissible and what is not due to the lack of a codified policy or by-law,” he said.
The by-laws clearly state that no person is allowed to place any obstruction on a public road.

The city had previously acted on and removed illegal boom gates in some communities.
But Johan Burger, an expert for the Institution for Security Studies, supported the motion.
He said given the recent crime statistics it was about time the city reviewed such policies.

He said that some residents had lost confidence and trust in the police and felt unsafe in their homes.
“Generally, people in gated communities feel much safer than those in open areas, the survey shows.
“We must remember that private security has no authority to search in public spaces, they can only record the movement of the cars,” he said.

Burger also highlighted ramifications that may come with approving private security measures on public roads.
“It may also be seen as a form of exclusion of certain people based on race and social status. Most communities are mixed in terms of race and culture, I have seen this causing some problems in other areas,” Burger warned. 
Deputy Mayor Fawzia Peer, chairperson of the safety committee, also felt it may have a positive impact on fighting crime, but the committee has not considered reviewing the by-laws.

“We have noted that the interest was shown by some communities, but police had to act on that because it is against our laws. 
If this has to happen, the planning committee will have to approve it because it involves building permanent structures. 
“There should also be a consensus among the residents because some may feel intimidated and annoyed at being stopped and questioned on a public road,” said Peer.

Sunday Tribune