Durban - By this time tomorrow, we will know which of the province's 54 municipalities is the most creative and innovative service delivery. 
The annual KZN Municipal Excellence Awards take place on Thursday. 

Winners will be announced at a gala function hosted by KZN MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nomusa Dube-Ncube at at the Greyville Race Course. The aim of the much–coveted KZN Municipal Excellence Awards is to reward municipalities that are excelling in the delivery on their constitutional mandate, especially basic service delivery. 
This process seeks to recognise and motivate municipalities to go beyond the call of duty in their endeavours to deliver basic services to residents. 
The MEC said in recent months, municipalities have been under a lot of pressure as service delivery protests mount and municipalities themselves are often labelled as wastelands of non-achievement. 

"Contrary to this negative narrative that municipalities often receive, many are close to achieving universal access to water, sanitation and electricity - something considered a pipe dream before 1994," Dube-Ncube said. 
These prestigious awards are yet another mechanism designed to improve the efficiency of municipalities, improve the quality of life for all citizens and to encourage service excellence in municipalities. 
The key performance areas that will be measured center around the five pillars of Back to Basics:



 Putting the people and their concerns first;
 Creating conditions for decent living by consistently delivering municipal services to the right quality and standards;
 Demonstrating good governance and administration by cutting wastage, spending public monies prudently, and hiring competent staff, ensuring transparency and accountability;
 Ensuring sound financial management and accounting and prudently managing resources to sustainably deliver services and bring development to communities; and
 Building and maintaining sound institutional and administrative capabilities, administered and managed by dedicated and skilled personnel at all levels.



Mayors, councillors, municipal managers, local government practitioners and stakeholders will form part of the proceedings.
The Mercury