Durban - After finding out what you qualify for and partnering with an estate agent you can trust, the fun part of your property search begins. But, as anybody who has ever been single would know, being on the market might be fun at first, but can quickly become stale after months of unfruitful searching.
Before you take yourself off the market altogether, Regional Director and CEO of RE/MAX of Southern Africa, Adrian Goslett, provides his tips on how to simplify your house hunting to ensure that you find your dream home before your patience runs out:

Get real with your agent - The quickest way to find a home is to make sure your estate agent has a true understanding of what you’re searching for. Explain anything and everything that could be useful to your agent. This includes your wish list and how you envision the space to function (be it a family home, single person’s crash pad, or bed and breakfast), as well as what you dislike about your current home and what you wish your new home would have that your current home lacks. It also helps if you can explain your design aesthetic (for example, modern or traditional) to your agent so they know which kinds of properties you might prefer.
Disclose non-negotiables - Nobody has time to waste. Make sure you save both yourself and your agent some time by setting out all your non-negotiables up front (for example, number of bedrooms or budget). Factors many buyers forget to mention is any relevant allergies or medical issues they might have. For example, if you are allergic to thatch, you need to disclose this to your agent so they do not show you any homes with thatch roofing. Similarly, if your allergic to bees, plants or other common features in and around the home, your agent needs to know so that they can check if the home might pose any potential threats to your health before you arrange for a viewing.
Limit property portal searches - Ultimately, your agent will be doing most of the searching on your behalf. However, it might be useful in the early stages of the house hunting process to show your agents which listings have caught your attention. This can give them a better idea of the kinds of homes you’re drawn to. However, what’s not helpful is to waste hours searching these sites on your own. Many online listings are deceiving, so you can end up wasting a lot of your time by going to view these properties without first consulting your agent.

While the process might be tedious, Goslett encourages buyers not to give up. 
“The right home is out there for you, you just need to enlist the help of the right real estate professional to help you in your search for the perfect real estate match,” he said.
The Mercury