Durban - Seekignn shelter from loud fireworks, Jessy, a 1-year old Jack Russell terrier cross, squeezed herself into the engine compartment of her owner’s car.

 

 Oblivious to Jessy’s plight, her owner drove from their home in Malvern to Reservoir Hills, where her cries drew attention and she was rescued by Kloof and Highway SPCA trainee inspector, Israel Silevu
 , in a delicate 2-hour process.

 

 Jessy was petrified by the fireworks on Wednesday
  and
  crawled into the car, which was parked at her home. 

 

 Her owner, who asked not to be named, said she had been on her way to campus in Westville at about 7pm
  when she heard a noise coming from her engine.

 

 “I had no idea Jessy was in the car. I thought she was at home, sleeping. I began hearing sounds and I thought maybe I drove over an animal on the road. On my way to campus, I stopped at my friend’s house in Reservoir Hills to fetch her and I heard a proper bark and I knew there was a dog inside my car. 

 

 “That’s when I opened the bonnet and I saw Jessy. She gapped her way in from underneath the car and was trapped in the engine.”

 

 She said she was shocked and frantic to find her dog trapped there. According to her, Jessy’s legs were covered in oil, there were a few scratches on her hind paws, and she had suffered a burn at her rear end.

 

 “She looked quite scared, and her eyes looked pretty bad as well,” she said.

 

 Silevu was on duty when he received a call from the frantic pet owner, asking for help. 

 

 
  
  
   SEEKING shelter from loud fireworks, Jessy, a 1-year old Jack Russell terrier cross, squeezed herself into the engine compartment of her owner’s car. 
  
 

 The rescue operation took almost two hours because Silevu had to ensure that Jessy was freed with as little distress as possible. He asked that the dog be
  taken to a veterinarian for a full examination.

 

 According to Jessy’s owner, she is recovering from her traumatic experience. “She was at the vet for a while...
  She’s still not a 100% better. She’s not as hyper as she normally is so I wouldn’t say she’s back to her old self.”

 

 Brigitte Rossouw of Kloof and Highway SPCA advised pet owners to stay home with their animals and keep them inside on nights when fireworks are being set off. 

 

 “We also urge owners to microchip their pets or provide them with some form of identification around their collar. If owners are aware that their pets are scared of loud noises and fireworks, get them calming medication from a nearby vet. Lastly, owners should find ways to entertain their pets. Play music, give them a toy or stay with them indoors,” she said.

 

 Independent On Saturday