Durban - The SAPS is struggling to curb an exodus of police reservists - which is reducing its capacity to tackle crime.
According to a parliamentary reply from the police in response to a question by the DA, since 2010 the number of police reservists has fallen by 82%.

DA MP and spokesperson on police, Dianne Kohler-Barnard, said the reply showed there were well over 63000 reservists in 2010 and the number dropped to 11015 by last month.
The decline has been attributed to a number of factors, including new qualifying rules for reservists, difficulty in processing reservists’ applications, and disillusionment after a moratorium was placed on taking on reservists.
KwaZulu-Natal had 2492 police reservists in 2010 and the figure fell to a record low of 606 members by April last year. It had since increased to 964 last month.

“In 2010, the number of police reservists stood at 63592 and many were used to man stations as officers were out on the streets to protect the thousands of visitors for the Fifa World Cup,” said Kohler-Barnard. 
“A year later, there was a moratorium on taking on reservists. The policy was also changed, which excluded 70% of the existing experienced and dedicated members and now, eight years later, the total number has dropped,” said Kohler-Barnard. 
She said reservists should be welcomed as the under-resourced SAPS was battling to contain crime.

“I have visited police stations and some have many reservists on their books, but very few are actually showing up to work,” she said. 
Kohler-Barnard said there were issues with reservists as some had started demanding jobs.
“Instead of dealing with that, the whole system was shut down and a moratorium was placed (on hiring them) for about three years. 

“There are now new regulations that if you want to be a reservist you have to be of a certain age and fully employed,” she said. 
Johan Burger, a consultant at the Institute for Security Studies, said reservists acted as a force multiplier for the police and the service’s dwindling numbers would mean that officers, who were already spread thin on the ground, would be further stretched to perform duties that could have been covered by reservists.
He said many of those applying to be reservists found it very difficult to have their applications processed. 

The national police failed to respond to a request for comment sent on Monday.
The Mercury