Durban - One always expects perfection from the navy, no matter which navy we are talking about. After all, they are all highly trained and disciplined, aren’t they?
Well, not exactly always. Many of the foul-ups involving naval vessels at sea were the result of miscalculation, over-confidence, stubbornness and at times stupidity. Even the mighty US Navy is not immune - in the past year or so two of its highly sophisticated destroyers managed to collide with merchant vessels with loss of life, resulting in the disciplining of senior officers up to the rank of admiral.

In South Africa our navy has few ships and they are deployed at sea on so few occasions that mishaps are automatically minimised, but it doesn’t mean embarrassing accidents can’t happen.
The South African naval base at Simon’s Town is home to practically the entire navy fleet, minus three or so patrol vessels based at the Durban naval base. The navy is relatively small - in fact the SA Navy probably has more admirals than ships, and is severely underfunded and undermanned. But that is surely no reason why a naval tug should suddenly sink at her mooring.
The tug, De Mist, is one of two that have been replaced with new tugs and are de-commissioned and moored within a basin at Simon’s Town, awaiting disposal.

At around 5am on a recent Saturday, officers were making their rounds when they noticed that the De Mist was listing. A strong wind was blowing the little vessel and lifting it against a pneumatic fender placed between the tug and the concrete quayside.
The fender apparently burst and the tug was blown half on to the deflated fender, causing one side of the vessel to dip into the bay. The tug cannot have been secured with closed hatches and enough water was admitted to cause the vessel to sink into water that is between 8m and 10m deep.
The navy has its own divers and salvage people but by the time they arrived it was too late, and the tug had mostly disappeared beneath the waters.

The navy is now attempting to refloat the vessel using its own people, while an inquiry has been established to examine the circumstances of the De Mist’s demise.
An even more embarrassing incident involved the Norwegian Navy, which managed to sink one of its own modern frigates after colliding with another vessel, a Maltese-flagged tanker named Sola TS.
This occurred at 4am as the Norwegian frigate, HNoMS Helge Ingstad was returning to base after taking part in a large Nato exercise known as Trident Juncture. The 250m tanker was sailing from a nearby oil terminal.

With a hole torn in the side of the ship the frigate commander, with the aid of tugs, deliberately ran his ship aground on a rocky shore, although the Norwegian Navy has another version. In a short statement it said it “moved the ship to a safe place”.
Steel cables were swiftly welded to the ship and anchored ashore, but when these snapped the frigate sank deeper in her “safe place” until just the mast, antennas and radar remained above the water.
Further attempts will now be made to salvage one of the navy’s most important ships, and yet another inquiry has been set up.

The Mercury