Durban - An independent commission investigating myriad sexual harassment allegations at the SABC has found that most cases were swept under the carpet in an attempt to protect the senior managers who victimised, intimidated and sought sexual favours from female colleagues.
Unpacking the findings and recommendations on Tuesday, commission chairperson Barbara Watson revealed shocking details from the cases they probed, finding that victims did not get the protection they deserved.

KwaZulu-Natal featured prominently in the inquiry, with the bulk of the cases emanating from years of alleged misconduct at the Lotus FM radio station in Durban. 
The commission of inquiry into sexual harassment at the public broadcaster was set up in June this year. The commission presented its final report to the SABC board, which the members accepted in its entirety.
Watson said that in most cases, the commission found the SABC’s Human Resources department failed to apply company policies and colluded with senior managers to cover up sexual harassment cases.

Watson said they found that there was an urgent need to focus on both the Channel Africa and Lotus FM leadership and to address the worrying cases of gender-based violence at both SABC entities.
Watson said whistle-blowers and some complainants angrily made statements that the SABC, particularly Channel Africa, was “like a brothel run by prostitutes”, and that Lotus FM “was run by men who regarded the station as their fiefdom and the women their personal harem”. 
Watson said the complaints and whistle-blowers from the province were so substantial that the commission had to move to KZN to host hearings for a short while. This was the only province to which they brought the commission.

Although each case had its own set of recommendations, the commission did not call for anyone to be dismissed. Instead it recommended that some individuals be suspended pending an investigation, and that some cases be reopened “as if it happened today”. 
Watson said the inquiry was organisation-wide, and submissions came from all the provinces in which the SABC had a presence, except the Western Cape.
The commission said some of the alleged perpetrators refused to consult with it. 

“The alleged perpetrators were shrewd, cunning and knew how to work the system,” Watson said. 
Of the cases the commission investigated, it found that no alleged perpetrator was ever suspended or found guilty of sexual harassment. It was also found that none of the complainants were men. 
“Those charged were allowed to work and then found guilty of unprofessional behaviour, and not sexual harassment where cases went that far,” she said.

The commission dealt with 10 cases lodged by victims and seven cases lodged by whistle-blowers. They interviewed 25 SABC officials, 11 alleged perpetrators and two external witnesses. The commission also received 40 comprehensive submissions. 
All the complainants bar two were freelancers. The names of the complainants and perpetrators were withheld to allow the SABC to implement the recommendations in the report.
Commissioner Mfanozwele Shozi told of one incident in 2014 when a Channel Africa manager, after weeks of advances, allegedly walked into a woman’s office and asked her to touch his penis.

Shozi said the woman did not report the matter as she thought she could handle the situation, however when she denied his sexual advances, she was victimised. 
When the matter was eventually reported, the findings were “soft” and were only discussed with the alleged perpetrator, and not with the woman.
In another case that has already been given media coverage, a woman was dismissed without a disciplinary hearing after nude images and videos of her surfaced on social media without her consent. Watson said the SABC took a decision to dismiss her to placate upset listeners, however, in their view the SABC corroborated with the alleged perpetrator who distributed the images. 

Shozi said the alleged perpetrators displayed “arrogant” and “you-can’t-touch-me” attitudes during the inquiry’s proceedings. 
In what was described as one of the worst cases, Shozi said one woman was not even a week into her new job when her manager made sexual advances towards her. At first it was a hug that lasted too long, comments about her “sexy” perfume and then a request to touch her body. “After she told him she was married and that her husband worked in the SABC’s HR department, she was victimised. She eventually resigned,” he said. 
The woman’s husband also resigned after bearing witness to what happened to his wife, and the couple, who became impoverished as they were unable to find other jobs, eventually divorced. 

Shozi said the alleged perpetrator in that case had refused to talk to the commission.
“The manager refused to appear before us. He even approached his union in his quest to not give us answers. He has not accounted for his behaviour. We recommend the SABC immediately suspend him and investigate,” said Shozi.
Watson said almost all cases were older than five years, but the complainants still carried the pain and hoped that one day they would see justice done. 

SABC spokesperson Neo Momodu said the SABC board had instructed the executive management to implement the recommendations with immediate effect. The board had also recommended that the commission be appointed to monitor the implementation of the recommendations, and to provide regular feedback to the board.
The Mercury