Durban - Domestic carrier Mango Airlines has issued an apology after passengers were left stranded for several hours due to inclement weather and landing issues at King Shaka International Airport on Tuesday.
Passengers said that their luggage was taken off the plane and left unattended on the tarmac. Some said that they were not given food or water while they had to sit for hours in the aircraft.

Passengers on board Mango flight JE532 were scheduled to depart from Cape Town and land in Durban two hours later. However, due to inclement weather, the flight - which allegedly tried to land twice - had to be rerouted to OR Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg. 
Tired and hungry, passengers boarded a plane on Wednesday and were flown to Durban. 
Passengers took to social media to express their anger at the delay. 

One of the passengers claimed that one of the plane’s wings was damaged and as a result the plane could not land at King Shaka. 
Another passenger, Claudia Bostock, said the ordeal was traumatic for those aboard. 
“We were given 330ml of water in four hours with no option to purchase food or beverages. We were threatened with no refund if we left the plane,” she said. 

Another passenger, Leanka Moodley, said very little support or comfort was offered from the staff. 
“When we did arrive in Durban, there was no offer to arrange transport to shuttle the delayed passengers,” she said. 
A passenger, who declined to be named, said the only comfort offered was from fellow passengers. 

“It was very traumatic for us. We were tired and hungry and we were told there was no food. Some of the passengers managed to get to the snack trolley where they found sandwiches and wraps.
“We shared that among ourselves. Some people offered others some time to charge their cellphones on laptops. The camaraderie is what I will remember,” she said. 
Mango spokesperson Sergio dos Santos said the airline regretted the inconvenience. 

“The plane was diverted to OR Tambo due to inclement weather in Durban. As a precaution, the aircraft was changed and for security reasons guests could not re-enter the terminal. All affected guests have been offered a voucher and formal apologies for the inconvenience caused,” he said. 
Airports Company of South Africa spokesperson in KwaZulu-Natal, Colin Naidoo, said during bad weather it is the pilots and airline’s decision to either fly back to the airport of departure or to the closest airport. 
“That is done for the safety of the passengers and the aircraft. It must also be established where the bad weather was being experienced, which would have allowed the pilot to make that decision.

“It is also the responsibility of the airline concerned to ensure that those affected passengers are rerouted to their final destination,” he said.
The Mercury