Durban - Moments before he shot and killed his estranged wife and her brother at a divorce court on Monday, an off-duty police officer had asked for his wife’s address.
Dibuseng Chiliza, 33, along with Gert Remoratile Moss, were shot dead on Monday by Dibuseng’s husband, Sergeant Phumlani Chiliza, in Durban Regional Court O, where divorce cases are heard.

Chiliza, who worked at the Protection and Security Services unit in KwaMashu, then turned the gun on himself. He died in hospital on Monday night.
On Tuesday, attorney Wendy Cele, who had been representing Dibuseng in her divorce, said while standing outside the court during the short tea adjournment, Chiliza had requested the physical address of her client.
“I refused to give out her address because I feared for my client’s safety,” said Cele.

Cele said a few moments later as she was walking into the courtroom and talking to Chiliza’s attorney, she saw Chiliza ahead of her.
 She said she then heard gunshots.
“That’s when I saw my client laying there and I ran for my life,” Cele said.

She said although the divorce proceedings had not been acrimonious, Chiliza had been using “delay tactics” and had changed attorneys a few times. 
“The matter was going to proceed (on Monday) as both parties had signed a settlement agreement but when we got to court the defendant (Chiliza) wanted the agreement to be set aside,” she said.
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said the SAPS manages officers who are dealing with depression and stress through the Employee Health and Wellness component.

“Trained members offer counselling to SAPS members as well as advice on how to manage stress,”she said.
Gwala added that police officers who use their firearms contrary to the Firearms Control Act are dealt with as all other firearm owners.
She said that when a police officer has been issued with a state firearm, it remains his or her duty to safeguard the firearm in terms of the Act.

“When the member is off-duty and there is a life-threatening situation, the police officer must place himself or herself on duty,” said Gwala.
The Mercury