Durban - Thirty Durban pipers and drummers will get to play a once-in-a-lifetime tribute on Sunday as the world remembers the centenary of the signing of the Armistice of 11 November, 1918.
And at 6am at the Durban Cenotaph, exactly 100 years after the armistice was signed between the Allies and Germany, marking the end of the fighting on the Western Front and ultimately the end of World War I, the tartan-clad pipers and drummers of the Durban Regiment, the Natal Mounted Rifles (NMR) Regiment, and 1 Medical Battalion will play the haunting tune When the Battle’s O’er twice, an instruction of old to those soldiers remaining on the battlefield to “cease fire”.

Millions were killed and wounded in the Great War, including 2000 pipers. While pipers around the world have been invited to take part in the poignant tribute, Pipe Major Captain Ken Mustard of the Durban Regiment, said it had been decided that drummers should also be involved in the local ceremony.
It is one of two extra commemorative events that are being added to the usual Remembrance Service ceremonies - which honour those who lost their lives in war - and will be attended by serving military members, veterans and civilians. The second additional ceremony will unfold some 12 hours later at the Sunset Parade - or Shadow march - in front of the Cenotaph.
As sunset in Durban will be at 6.26pm, the veterans will form up at the Cenotaph about 15 minutes earlier in time for the Beacon of Light ceremony, where beacon fires will be lit at sunset around the world. 

Colonel Pat Acutt, the Senior Staff Officer Defence Reserves of the SANDF, said a gas lamp would be lit for the Beacon of Light.
“The lighting of the flame symbolises the lighting of the evening fires/beacons on the battlefield and is now also recognised as the Beacon of Hope. This will be followed by bugle calls of The Last Post.” 
Participants will be up at the crack of dawn on Sunday in time for the first ceremony, after which the gathering will move to the SS Mendi memorial on the shores of Durban Bay, next to the Port Natal Maritime Museum, where the pipers and drummers will again be in action and where a member of the SA Navy will lay a wreath during a short ceremony. 

Then it is back to the Cenotaph for the annual Remembrance Service at 10.30am, which will involve the SANDF band and company of troops on parade in Dorothy Nyembe Street. 
The Mercury