Durban - A truck driver allegedly transporting popcorn seeds was arrested by Pinetown Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI) officers after it was found overloaded by more than 20 tons early on Saturday morning.
The freight-liner travelling on the N3 towards Durban was stopped and weighed during an intelligence-driven operation by the RTI Pinetown weighbridge team. 

A freight-liner of that size is usually allowed 49700kg. However once it was on the scale, officers found it weighed almost 74000kg.
Two trucks from the same company were weighed in the overnight operation, resulting in both drivers being arrested and cases being opened against them at the Pinetown police station. 
It is believed that the company - a habitual offender that was not named by the department - was regularly operating a series of overloaded vehicles along the N3 corridor. 

According to sources, these vehicles were operating during the early hours of the morning in an attempt to avoid traffic officers on the road. The first truck driver was caught by provincial inspector, Ryan Bharath, who noticed the vehicle while patrolling, and suspected it was overloaded. The driver allegedly noticed the traffic officer’s vehicle and pulled over, claiming there was a mechanical fault with the truck. 
“The officer stood by until a breakdown service arrived and once the truck was hitched, the tow truck driver was instructed to move the vehicle to his destination of choice via the RTI Pinetown weigh-bridge. Once there, the truck was found to be overloaded by 16 tons,” said a source. 
The second, and heaviest, truck was caught by provincial inspector Sandile Hadebe at around 5.30am travelling to Pietermaritzburg near the truck stop at Cato Ridge.

Department of Transport spokesperson Kwanele Ncalane said the department was focusing on heavily laden vehicles due to the number of fatal crashes involving trucks.
Ncalane said the department was also implementing an integrated plan following the burning of trucks in Mooi River recently. 
The Mercury