Durban - A Pick n Pay franchise in the Western Cape has been forced to stop selling mugs emblazoned with the words “The Maid” and “The Gardener” after social media users complained they were offensive and disrespectful.
Twitter user @toni_verna was the first person to tweet a picture of the mugs saying she had seen the mugs at the retailer’s Observatory branch and that she found them “problematic.”


 




Many other social media users said they could not believe that 24 years after apartheid, some employers would maintain a racist stance and rather buy their workers their own utensils than share with them.

On Facebook, Khanda Vilakazi wrote that it was not only a way to discriminate in terms of social status but also on the basis of race.
“During the apartheid years, especially the 1980s, when a black maid or black gardener was hired by a white master, in most families, they were not allowed to use their employers’ utensils. Instead, such employers would go to such stores as Pick ‘* Pay and others to buy utensils especially for their employees. So whoever designed the print must have used it to perpetuate such divisions,” he wrote. 
Pick n Pay spokesperson Janine Caradonna apologised for the incident and said the mugs were sold at only one store.

“We asked the franchisee to remove them immediately, which he did. In selling these products, our franchisee was operating outside our rules. We have made it clear to all our franchisees that this is not acceptable. We expect all Pick n Pay franchisees to uphold our positive values of respect for others and inclusiveness,” Caradonna said. 

 




The Mercury’s sister newspaper, The Star, spoke to the head of media at the Institute of Race Relations Michael Morris who said the fact that Pick * Pay instructed a franchisee to remove the offending mugs from its shelves following the criticism on social media highlights the importance of South Africans overcoming false and demeaning assumptions inherited from apartheid and the country’s colonial past.
Morris said products which play into demeaning stereotypes of domestic workers reinforce the false idea that South Africans’ interests are divisible by race or class, something which their research has repeatedly debunked.
The Mercury