Durban - The Richmond municipal manager has been granted special leave following “intense engagements” during a special council meeting on Friday, the municipality said.
Bongiwe Mnikathi applied for special leave because she did not feel safe at work. Last month, Mnikathi opened a case after she received a death threat via a text message a year after she took up the job. In the text message, she was told she would be dead by Monday, October 8 2018. 
At the time, KZN police confirmed the matter was being handled by the task team assembled to investigate politically-related matters in the province.
Mnikathi's predecessor Sibusiso Sithole was gunned down in March last year.
The Richmond Municipality on Friday confirmed council had approved Mnikathi's request for special leave. 
She had just returned at work on Monday this week after the Pietermaritzburg High Court ruled that her suspension be lifted. This stems from allegations that she had used the municipality’s credit card to buy alcohol amounting to R20 000, a claim she denies.
For months, Mnikathi and the Richmond Municipality have been involved in a bitter brawl which has led to basic services being disrupted after some employees at the municipality protested against her return.
Services such as the traffic had allegedly grounded to a halt since Monday. Municipal vehicles were used to block several council buildings, including the traffic department. 
“To the residents of Richmond the municipal council send sincere apologies for the inconvenience caused during the recent disruption of municipal services,” said the municipality.   
Deputy mayor, Khonziwe Mkhize said: “The intervention made by the head of department of Cogta (Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs) and his team gave us hope that we have turned the corner.”   
Richmond municipal spokesperson, Sibonelo Bhengu said: “We are in the process of appointing an acting municipal manager who will take up the position immediately,” he said. 
Sunday Tribune