Durban - The Kevin Richardson Foundation has raised more than R2.7 million on local rewards-based crowdfunding platform, Thundafund.com, breaking the record for the most money raised for a single campaign on a South African rewards platform.
The non-profit organisation launched the #LandforLions campaign to secure the Kevin Richardson Wildlife Sanctuary and ensure a safe home for the sanctuary lions forever. At present, the Kevin Richardson Wildlife Sanctuary is home to over 40 predator animals rescued from captive-breeding and cub-petting facilities. 

“My greatest fear is who will look after my lions when I am gone? These lions are responsible for attracting millions of followers on the ‘Lion Whisperer’ social media platforms; thus providing an engaging and entertaining space where individuals from across the globe are informed about the severe challenges and threats facing Africa’s lions," Richardson said. 

 


He said scientists predict that we are fast approaching a world without wild lions. In Africa, lions have been forced to survive on land that is only one-fifth of the size they occupied a few decades ago. If habitats shrink further, and the lion population continues to decline at the same rate, it is predicted that there will be almost no lions left in the wild in 20 years’ time. The increased threat of poaching of both wild and captive lions, encouraged by the growing demand for lion bones in the far east  (a trade that has been sanctioned by the South African government), is another growing concern for these iconic animals.
After many years of work as a animal behaviourist and public figure, Richardson launched the Foundation in early 2018. The Foundation is committed to changing and reversing the state of Africa’s declining lion population by purchasing habitat and raising awareness to create safe, natural spaces where lions and other native species can flourish. Partnering with specialised organisations and engaging with impoverished communities on the fringes of these protected areas, the foundation aims to minimise human/wildlife conflict, whilst improving living conditions for local villages.

The #LandforLions campaign went live on Thundafund.com on July 8 and closed on October 8, effectively raising R2.7m through 2147 backers. The funds raised for the #LandforLions campaign will go towards purchasing  land for the sanctuary lions as well as safeguarding a home in perpetuity for the neighboring wildlife.
"I hope that #LandforLions is just the beginning of what will be an ongoing movement where the public comes together in the fight to return habitat to our countries most majestic creatures," he said. 
The Mercury