Durban - The most important part of Black Friday shopping actually happens during the days leading up to the big event. By preparing and planning your shopping in advance, the experience becomes easier and more enjoyable. Elisabeth Pretorius, property manager of Broll’s Springfield Retail Centre, shares some tips on how to make your Black Friday shopping experience an enjoyable one.
Dress Appropriately - It’s important to dress appropriately on the day – comfortable shoes and gear are important so you can move around quickly. That being said- maybe packing a few plasters in your back pocket is a good idea too, just in case you develop a blister from all the walking around.

Keep Your Cool - It’s easy to become irritable on Black Friday – especially if its early, crowded and intense. Some folk are bound to get angry and impatient which results in possible arguments between shoppers over items and spots in line.
Before you snap, just remember why you’re there in the first place - Black Friday is saving you money, and allowing you to buy the things that you ordinarily couldn’t afford. So, take a step back (but not out of the line, of course), breathe and maybe even make some new acquaintances - it’ll make the experience much for more / pleasant?.
Bring a Snack - Shopping in a huge crowd is one thing, but shopping and being hungry is another story! An easy way of ensuring the ‘hangry’ doesn’t get stroppy/ come out, is to pack some light snacks, be it a granola bar, biscuits, or even some cheddars, something that’s light enough just to just pop in your bag before leaving home. If you want something more substantial though, send your shopping partner to the food court, to have a bit of a timeout, before being ready to find some extra awesome deals. 

Create a Game Plan - Black Friday is a pretty hardcore shopping experience is not a day for window shopping. It’s a hardcore shopping experience, and if you don’t make a plan, you could get lost in the shuffle. More often than not, retailers will have teaser deals, also known as Black Friday doorbusters, to get you in their door and then buying a whole lot of other things too, this is how they get you. Know what you want ahead of time, stay focused, and only purchase items you need.
Keep in mind that high-demand purchases (such as game consoles) may be limited, so if that’s something that’s on your list, make sure to get to that section of the store first.
Set a Budget - This may seem like an obvious one, but you’d be surprised how many people go shopping, especially during big sale events like Black Friday, without any kind of budget. This is an incredibly dangerous way to go shopping, as it could land you in large amounts of unnecessary debt. Instead, give yourself a maximum amount that you allow yourself to spend and then write a list of things that you need, a priority list of sorts, from most important to least.

The Mercury