Durban - Decision-makers at Newcastle Municipality are unfazed by the mounting debt of more than R180million owed to Eskom, with mayor Makhosini Nkosi assuring residents that “everything is under control”.
As of this month, the cash-strapped municipality owed Eskom R182.8m, of which R52m was paid in early October, Nkosi confirmed, sending a copy of the proof of payment to The Mercury. 

He said the debt was accumulated over time and, due to challenges with cash flow, the municipality started to default. 
“The money will always come, but not when it is needed,” he said. 
In a report to the municipality’s finance portfolio committee last month, it was stated that the municipality failed to pay its monthly account of R63.2m in full at the end of August, and was only able to pay R10m. However, R5m went to the previous month’s debt and only R5m was allocated to the council’s payment arrangement plan, being paid towards the R63m debt.

The report stated that three factors contributed to the escalating debt owed to Eskom: lower-than-acceptable levels of the monthly payments, resulting in a monthly shortfall in revenue; fixed monthly costs exceeding the actual monthly revenue collected; and the first tranche of equitable share for the current year used up to pay for the previous years’ debts, which reduces available money to fund the current year’s operations.
The report also informed councillors that most of the money received was diverted and not paid towards the Eskom account - used to fund employee costs and other trade creditors and incidental expenses.
According to Nkosi, one manufacturer added to their financial woes as it owed the municipality more than R35m for power. He said the municipality had to reach an agreement that the manufacturer pay for power in advance while still paying off its debt.

Discussions on the matter were broadened to include the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and the provincial treasury after the municipality was included in a list of six municipalities which had defaulted on payments to Eskom.
DA constituency chairperson Bebsie Cronjé this week raised the alarm that ratepayers could face a blackout should the municipality default in the payment of any of the amounts in the arrangement plan.
Should the municipality default, according to the report, the full balance owing, with interest, would become due and payable immediately, with Eskom allowed to take legal remedies and disconnect the supply of electricity to the municipality within seven days of the date of default. 

As part of the payment agreement, the municipality agreed to pay another R5m by December 3.
“It is time that the paying residents and businesses of Newcastle take a stance against the ANC for the way they gamble with our lives and money, and start holding the ANC leadership accountable for the financial problems of the Newcastle Municipality,” Cronjé said in a statement to The Mercury. 
Spokesperson for Eskom in KZN Joyce Zingoni said she could not comment on any customer’s payment status without their approval. 

The municipality has since introduced an incentive scheme to reduce debt and has embarked on a community outreach programme to encourage the payment of current accounts. 
The municipality has also developed a “revenue enhancement strategy” aimed at dealing with problem areas and seeking new revenue streams.
“A pilot project has been initiated with regard to the installation of tamper-proof water meters in specific areas to counter non-payment by residents of these areas,” Nkosi said.

The Mercury