Durban - His ability to reopen and solve cold cases in which women and children were sexually abused has ensured that constable Thokozani Mthimkhulu is highly regarded by his colleagues and feared by criminals.
Mthimkhulu was among dedicated hard-working police officers who were celebrated this week in a glitzy affair at the SAPS Provincial Excellence Awards in Durban. 

Acting provincial commissioner Lieutenant-General Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi said the awards ceremony was an effort to instil a culture of service excellence.
Hailing from Amajuba in Newcastle, Mthimkhulu was the winner of the Employee of the Year in the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences (FCS level 5-7) category.
On his success in re-opening old cases and solving them, Mthumkhulu said nine alleged serial rapists were in custody awaiting trial after he reopened cases.

“I really love my job because I am fighting for women and children. Even if I am offered a higher position in another unit, I will not take it because this is where I am meant to be and keeping women and children safe is what I am meant to be doing,” he said. 
His commander, Captain Nagesh Moothilal, described Mthimkhulu as a “dedicated, humble officer who shows the greatest amount of compassion to victims”.
“He is well-loved and our go-to guy in the unit. He was even head-hunted by a security company because of his informer network and ability to track criminals, but he turned it down. It is not about the money for him, it is about this being his calling.” 

Walking away with the Woman Officer of the Year Award, Chatsworth police communications officer Captain Cheryl Pillay said she was overwhelmed as this was the second consecutive year she had won the award. 
“It is heart-warming and reassuring to know that your perseverance and tenacity can make your dreams come true. The life of a police officer is very challenging, but it is recognition like this that brings a smile to our faces.”
Pillay is the communications officer for Chatsworth and eThekwini inner south cluster. She is also part of the SAPS provincial volleyball team and hosts a “learn to swim” campaign at the Chatsworth station, where she encourages police officers to swim. 

Pillay said she dedicated her award to her husband, Malcolm, and son Joel, who are her biggest supporters. 
“I suffered severe post-traumatic stress when I was shot while responding to an armed robbery in 2009. I spent a long time in hospital and it was my son who came to hospital with cupcakes and candles to celebrate my 20 years of service that made me vow to never let my PTSD get the better of me,” she said. 
 Amajuba FCS was also chosen as the second best-performing unit in the province, while Moothilal was awarded the runner-up best commander.

The Mercury