* This story has been updated

 

 Durban - LOTUS FM was flagged as the worst of the SABC’s departments when the public broadcaster’s findings and recommendations stemming from its commission of inquiry into sexual harassment were released on Tuesday. 

 

 The report stated that “Lotus FM was run by men who regard the station as their fiefdom and the women their personal harem” and the SABC was labelled
  a “brothel run by prostitutes”. 

 

 “There is a worrying history of  gender-based violence cases from Lotus FM, indicating a need for strong leadership, which appears weak,” reads the report. It adds that it would be advisable for the legal section to support the leadership so that the SABC does not incur high reputational damage and litigation costs.

 

 Lotus FM’s station manager Alvin Pillay did not respond to messages seeking comment. 

 

 Former SABC employee Vanessa  Govender, who testified at the commission of inquiry, said the goings-on at the SABC were symptomatic of the constant daily threat that women in the country faced. 

 

 She added that this corporate culture was not exclusive to the public broadcaster. 

 

 In her book, Beaten But Not Broken, Govender revealed the alleged physical and sexual abuse she suffered at the hands of a fellow employee at the SABC. 

 

 She said she had become emotional during the live television broadcast, adding that it was a moment where she and others were finally acknowledged. 

 

 
  
  
   Shocking and widespread details of sexual harassment have been revealed at SABC.
  
 

 “My experience can never be undone but it played a small role in trying to create a safer place for other young women at the SABC. It was worth reliving my trauma when it came to writing the book and speaking to the commission.” 

 

 Commission chairperson Barbara Watson revealed that over 40 people had spoken during the inquiry, including whistle-blowers of alleged sexual harassments.
  

 

 The recommendations by the  commission included training workshops and policies and procedures to empower staff in respect of gender equality and human rights.'

 

 * This story has been updated.

 

 Sunday Tribune Herald