Durban - The internal audit committee in eThekwini has raised concerns about the instability at the City’s legal unit and the municipality’s reluctance to implement many of the recommendations from its investigations unit.
These matters are raised in a report on the fourth quarter of 2017/2018 which ended in June this year. The report was tabled at the meeting of the city’s executive committee on Tuesday. 

Regarding issues at the legal unit, the committee points out that over the past three years there had been three different heads of the unit, and asks the City’s leadership to establish the root cause of this.
The last head of the unit, Gideon Phungula, was fired earlier this month just four months after he was appointed to the position.
His axing came after he was found guilty by an internal disciplinary hearing which probed charges of misconduct against him including that he had tried to influence the outcome of a disciplinary hearing against one official and that he had made racist remarks against Indians, including his then colleagues at the municipality.

“For this unit to be effective there has to be continuity at the top because most of the City’s litigation cases have a lifespan of more than three years. Management was requested to provide the root cause of this instability and the action plans to eradicate the root causes,” reads the report. 
Regarding investigations from the City’s investigations and integrity unit (CIIU), the audit committee noted that only a fraction of the recommendations had been implemented.
It said that of the 377 matters brought forward from quarter 3, only 16 were implemented. “Commitment to implement the recommendations from CIIU was required from management,” the committee says in its report. On the issue of CIIU investigations, the audit committee pointed out that six cases had been under investigation “for a long time without any visible progress”. 

“Challenges around the CIIU were highlighted which included resource constraints and historical backlogs. A promise was made to deal with the current backlogs by the end of November 2018.”
It also requested the CIIU to expedite the approval of the Fraud Prevention Policy, the Fraud and Corruption Prevention Strategy and the Whistle Blower Policy so that these could be implemented.
Furthermore, on legal services providers, the audit committee felt that the City needed to do more to ensure there was transformation.

It noted that over the past five years the City had not used black legal firms. “The audit committee requested management to consider reviewing the policy in order to address some of the transformational matters.”
The committee also noted poor attendance of its meetings by deputy city managers, saying the city manager had been requested to address this.
IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the instability in the legal unit showed that the municipality was not protected and added that urgent action was needed. He said, however, the problems at the unit had to do with cronyism.

“We need to stop appointing people who are friendly to us. Let us appoint people who will come here and advise us accordingly. The fact of the matter is that we are losing so many cases,” he said.
Nicole Graham of the DA said there were a number of items that repeatedly came up in the audit reports, saying that it showed that there was “simply a lack of political will” for the matters to be resolved.
One such issue was that of bad buildings in the city which had been raised as a concern in subsequent audit committee reports.

She said the instability in the legal unit was an indication of how some of the most basic functions of the municipality had been captured and politicised.
The Mercury