Durban - Concerns have been raised that a recent spate of kidnapping attempts in Pietermaritzburg might be linked to a syndicate operating in the capital city after two women fought off alleged kidnappers last month.
Police statistics show a 115% increase in kidnappings in South Africa over the last 10 years, from 2535 to 5455 incidents.

Public concern is growing about the kidnapping or abduction of children, with alarming stories doing the rounds on social media.
The latest release of crime statistics in September made no mention of human trafficking, although South Africa ranks on the Tier 2 watchlist of the US State Department.
The two most recent incidents in Pietermaritzburg took place in Scottsville and Clarendon. 

Police confirmed they were investigating the two cases of attempted kidnapping, but said they had not yet linked the cases. 
A 21-year-old woman narrowly escaped being kidnapped on Coronation Road in Scottsville last Sunday while she was returning from grocery shopping. 
The woman said a group of men travelling in a vehicle stopped her and offered to help her with her shopping bags, but, after ignoring their requests, two men allegedly grabbed her shopping bags and tried to force her into the vehicle.

A couple driving past stopped to help the woman, and the men fled. 
She was left unharmed. An attempted kidnapping case was opened at the Alexandra police station.
In late October, a 14-year-old girl fought off alleged kidnappers in Clarendon near Voortrekker High School.

According to reports, the girl was followed by at least four men in a Suzuki vehicle as she walked home after school. The men told her to jump into the car, but the girl ran to a nearby resident and called for help and they fled. 
Earlier in the month, a Pietermaritzburg teenager was abducted, gang-raped and stabbed while on her way home from a wedding in Ashdown. 
In September, missing physiotherapist Shaista Naipal was found walking in the city centre by a colleague. She claimed she had been abducted by two foreigners who blindfolded and handcuffed her before taking her to an unknown destination.

Community Police Forum chairperson Milton Ncolisi said the increase in attempted kidnappings in the area around the Alexandra police station was worrying, and a “huge” concern for parents and residents. 
“The police are investigating the incidents in isolation to see where it leads them. We cannot rule out that a syndicate may be operating, but we have no doubt the investigations will prove fruitful,” he said. 
He said they were working closely with the police and urged the community to unite in protecting pupils and residents in the area. 

“We cannot just leave it to the police. The parents, schools, residents - everyone needs to come together. Report suspicious activity, keep an eye out as children walk past your home or business and make sure they are okay,” Ncolisi said.
The Mercury