Durban - A medical milestone was achieved at a Durban hospital this week - and an 82-year-old patient is feeling all the better for it.
Vernie Pautz of Westbrook, 40km north of Durban, became the landmark 100th patient to have a transcatheter aortic valve intervention (Tavi) procedure, a potentially life-saving operation in which diseased heart valves are replaced with artificial valves, which are usually made from biological material from cattle.

“He was in ICU (intensive care unit)for less than a day and is now back in the general ward - and he will be discharged on Sunday,” said Dr Keith Odayan, the cardiothoracic surgeon who, together with interventional cardiologist Dr Jaivadan Patel and their team, performed the life-changing procedure at Netcare St Augustine’s Hospital on Monday.
The Tavi centre at St Augustine’s is the only dedicated facility of its kind in KwaZulu-Natal and is one of just seven such facilities in the country. And it is the first to reach the milestone of performing its 100th procedure.
The procedure is an intricate, minimally invasive intervention that is used as an alternative to open-heart valve replacement surgery. 

It is often used as a last resort on patients whose health is so compromised that it would be too risky to perform conventional open-heart surgery as they might not survive.
“This procedure is quicker than the usual operation, taking about one hour compared to the two to three hours involved in conventional surgery. With conventional surgery, the patient would also have had to spend longer in the ICU. 
“Our 100th patient will start to feel the impact of the surgery in about two to three months,” Odayan said.

Jacques du Plessis, the managing director of the Netcare hospital division, said the intricate Tavi procedure required a high level of training, expertise and supporting technology.
“Doctors Patel and Odayan have been performing the procedure for close on a decade, and have consistently achieved outstanding clinical outcomes, saving the lives of many highly-compromised patients,” Du Plessis said.
Odayan added that it was not commonly known that the specialised procedure was available in KwaZulu-Natal.

The Mercury