Durban - Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan said signs of state capture started to emerge when Jacob Zuma took over the presidency in 2009.
Yesterday, Gordhan provided testimony at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry. A former SA Revenue Service (Sars) commissioner who was appointed the first finance minister under the Zuma presidency, Gordhan has become the first member of the ANC’s top brass to implicate Zuma in allegations of state capture. 

As Gordhan went through his statement, the EFF and the Black First Land First staged a protest outside the commission venue as part of their campaign against him.
EFF deputy president Floyd Shivambu accused Gordhan of having been an enabler of state capture before he fell out with Zuma. 
Shivambu said Gordhan had also lied under oath in Parliament about his meetings with the Guptas, adding that the party would not rest until he was removed from the Cabinet.

“He comes here today and acts as if he’s a paragon of political correctness. We’re going to bring him down, we’re going to expose all his shenanigans,” Shivambu said. 
The protests are expected to continue today as Gordhan resumes his testimony, days after former public enterprises minister Barbara Hogan also implicated Zuma in state capture. 
Hogan had accused Zuma of pressing her to appoint Siyabonga Gama as group chief executive for Transnet before she was removed.

Gordhan said after Hogan was removed in 2010, changes were made to the boards of public enterprises and allegations of corruption emerged, even though it took time before it was clear that a co-ordinated capture of the state was being pursued. 
“It looked like an ordinary set of events and then it still wasn’t clear until more of these changes were being made, but the picture was still fairly hazy. The kind of events that took place at the Treasury in late 2015 - the manner in which the nuclear issue was dealt with, for example - all began to suggest that there was more to it than an individual act of what we today call corruption,” Gordhan said. 
He was referring to the removal of former finance minister Nhlanhla Nene from his post in December, 2015. Nene was replaced by Des van Rooyen, allegedly at the request of the Gupta family, before he was quickly removed and replaced by Gordhan following negative reaction from the markets. 

Gordhan said Zuma’s decisions at the time pointed to a wider set of intentions and schemes that underpinned them. 
“The connecting of the dots began after the kind of harassment we were subjected to in 2016.
“The logical question must be why. If a principal does not want someone he has appointed to a particular position, you dismiss the person,” he said.

Gordhan said the penny finally dropped on Zuma’s intentions and the activities of the Guptas when the leaked Gupta emails came into the public domain, as they provided evidence about the role-players. 
Through evidence leader Paul Pretorius, Gordhan told the commission how Zuma was personally invested in the nuclear deal going through with Russia, despite red flags raised by the Treasury about the R1trillion transaction.
Gordhan also told the commission how Zuma pushed for the appointment of axed Sars boss Tom Moyane, despite an appointment process that was already under way with about 120 applicants. He accused Zuma of ignoring him when he suggested that a proper process be followed and that Moyane be tested against other candidates.

Gordhan said age played a role in memory lapses as he recalled his time as minister of finance between 2009 and 2014. “Particularly with reference to the work of finance minister, there were many different meetings and events, both internationally and locally. Not all these events and meetings are fresh in one’s mind. I had to rely on checking my diary at the Treasury and for my former chief of staff and officials to recall what really happened.”
Former Cabinet spokesperson Themba Maseko has also accused the former president of instructing him to assist the Guptas with getting government advertising for their media business, and former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor claimed Zuma was present but not in the room when she was summoned by the Guptas to Saxonwold and offered a ministerial post.
The Mercury