Durban - THE fight over amending the Constitution to allow land expropriation without compensation is poised to intensify as some parties are considering taking the matter to court.
This follows the constitutional review committee adopting a report calling for section 25 to be amended.

This means the committee’s report will, in the coming weeks, be tabled in both houses of Parliament before the process to formulate a bill starts.
However, the DA, IFP, Cope, Freedom Front Plus (FF+) and the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) are unhappy with the way the committee dealt with submissions.
FF+ leader Corné Mulder yesterday said there was a possibility “that a legal process can be followed to set the committee’s decision aside, seeing as the process that the committee followed was flawed and riddled with errors”.

Mulder said his party would continue with its international awareness campaign and would be ready to fight again when the matter returns to Parliament on November 27.
The DA accused the ANC and the EFF of pushing through the review committee’s report, despite what it said were errors in procedure.
“Hundreds of thousands of written submissions were arbitrarily disregarded and access to all submissions was limited. The committee has thus not meaningfully engaged with the contents of the written submissions,” said DA MP Thandeka Mbabama.

She also accused President Cyril Ramaphosa of having pre-empted the process when he announced earlier this year that land expropriation without compensation would continue.
The DA also claimed that public hearings were characterised by threats and bullying.
The ANC dismissed the claims by the opposing parties, saying they were clutching at straws.

The ANC’s Vincent Smith said there was no bullying and everyone had been allowed to speak at public hearings. He rejected the proposal of testing the amendment at the Constitutional Court, saying parliamentarians couldn’t outsource their duties to the judiciary.
While those opposing the amendment have claimed that the ANC was using it to boost its chances at the polls, Smith said the amendment was unlikely to happen before the elections.
In a video posted on the EFF’s Twitter account, Julius Malema sounded confident. “We are becoming extremely near giving our people what rightfully belongs to them - the land of their forefathers.”

Meanwhile, Ramaphosa assured the EU yesterday that there would be no land grabs in South Africa. He said the process would be orderly and done in line with the law and Constitution.
“There is no reason to fear wholesale expropriation of land without compensation,” he told the EU parliament.
The Mercury