Durban - Calm has been restored to Richmond Municipality after the embattled municipal manager, Bongiwe Mnikathi, reportedly took special leave on Friday.
The Richmond council announced in a statement that Mnikathi would, from Friday last week, take special leave. 

Attempts to reach Mnikathi were unsuccessful. She has been at loggerheads with the council for the past few months. 
The issue came to a head last Monday when council workers abandoned work and others used council vehicles to block access to the buildings, protesting against her presence.
A source in the council said workers returned on Friday. 

“Work has resumed and the workers are quite happy. There was a meeting over two days with the council, the municipal manager and officials from the Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), at which an arrangement was reached for the municipal manager to go on leave. 
“I understand there was a proposal to buy her out of her contract that was rejected. The council maintained that it had charged her and wanted those charges finalised, rather than a payout,” said the source. 
In a statement, the Richmond municipality said Mnikathi had requested special leave from Friday until the case related to her suspension that is before the High Court in Pietermaritzburg has been finalised.

Deputy mayor Khonziwe Mkhize said they hoped the department’s intervention meant they had turned a corner. 
“To the residents of Richmond, the municipal council sends sincere apologies for the inconvenience caused during the recent disruption of municipal services,” she said. 
The source said Cogta had given the council the names of people who could act in the position while Mnikathi was on leave. 

“One of the names preferred by the workers is SB Mkhize, who is not among the names given and was deployed from the district (municipality) after the then municipal manager, Sibusiso Sithole, was killed. The workers prefer him - he is a pastor and understands the municipality,” said the source.
Cogta spokesperson Lennox Mabaso confirmed Mnikathi had been granted special leave. 
He said this was a temporary measure to allow the department to find a permanent solution.

The Mercury