Durban - Mooi River’s Bruntville township is very much in view from the N3. However, residents have a vista way beyond the traffic that stops at the town to pay tolls. Giant’s Castle is in the distance.
“You could see it for four seasons a year, including when it was snow-capped in winter,” said Vusi Khanyile, the Mooi River-born new chairperson of the board of the World Wide Fund for Nature South Africa (WWF-SA).

“So I was consistently in touch with, and influenced by, nature.”
He became hooked on the idea of climbing this peak and spends holiday time in the Drakensberg every year.
“Among WWF-SA’s priorities for the next financial year will be securing South Africa’s strategic water source areas while extending work on water in Africa with other WWF offices on the continent,” read a WWF-SA statement.

The view from Khanyile’s childhood doorstep is one such area and currently the focus of a fracas over fracking.
“It is critically important that we guard and preserve our sources of water so they are able to continue feeding us and our children in the future,” he told the Independent on Saturday.
Places like the Drakensberg, therefore, had to be “jealously guarded”, said Khanyile.

However, he noted that a balance was needed between the needs of the economy, including its energy resources, and the needs of society.
On another environmental issue just across the provincial border, in the Eastern Cape, Khanyile said it was regrettable that the Xolobeni mining debacle had to land up in court.
“I would have been happier if there had been adequate engagement between all the role-players,” he said, noting that the judgment was in the interests of society and the environment.

Dealing with plastic pollution and poverty, so prevalent in KZN, were high on the WWF-SA’s agenda, he said.
Khanyile also noted that more and more younger people and urban residents were becoming involved with the WWF-SA and conservation work needed to include the urban environment.
Khanyile takes over from Valli Moosa, who has chaired the WWF-SA board since 2011.

Moosa said he would continue to support the organisation as a trustee.
Khanyile, who recently stepped down as executive chair of the Thebe Investment Corporation, has served as a director on a number of listed and unlisted companies and is on various boards in a non-executive capacity.
As a community activist, he has worked closely with development programmes and community-based organisations, primarily in the education and civic movements, for most of his adult life.

Khanyile has an honours degree in accounting and finance from the University of Birmingham, held a fellowship in development finance at Princeton University, and has an honorary doctorate from Walter Sisulu University.
He continues to keep in touch with his Mooi River roots by visiting his extended family, the Khanyile clan, keeping an eye on the view of Giant’s Castle, influenced by whichever season of the year it happens to be.
Independent On Saturday