Durban - An internal ANC squabble is believed to be behind a fire at a councillor’s office in Asherville on Sunday.
Although the cause of the fire, which gutted the office of the proportional representation councillor, was yet to be established, ANC members in Ward 25 have speculated that it was linked to internal party squabbles.

Some members who spoke to The Mercury on condition of anonymity said the incident was related to earlier clashes which played themselves out as two opposing groups of ANC members clashed openly on Saturday.
Themba Mkhize, a member of the ANC branch executive committee in the area, said the party had on Saturday embarked on an open membership registration drive.
“This was meant to deal with and correct the perceptions that there had been membership gatekeeping in the ward, We then had some of the members who had previously claimed they were prevented from getting membership coming in to register. 

“However, the problems started when they heckled a deployee of the regional executive committee, saying they did not recognise the leadership,” he said.
The ward includes parts of Sydenham, Asherville and Springfield.
Mkhize said a scuffle broke out, resulting in some of the prospective members allegedly being assaulted. Three ANC members were also allegedly assaulted during the chaos.

Mkhize said it was clear that the councillor’s office had been targeted. 
“What is also clear is that there was no forced entry,” he said.
PR councillor Mxolisi Mzimbomvu would not comment on the cause of the fire. 

“I am still going to the police station. Maybe I will get more information there,” he said.
The councillor only confirmed the fire, saying he had been unable to get into the office to assess the damage as the police had been busy at the scene when he arrived.
Police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbhele, said the police were investigating arson. She said the offices had been set alight at about 1am.

ANC regional secretary Bheki Ntuli could not be reached for comment.
The Mercury