Durban - Ugu district municipality residents are complaining that they have not received water accounts for the last few months yet water meters are in the process of being disconnected by the municipality through the Revenue Collection Strategy process.
 This comes after the Ugu municipality manager DD Naidoo posted a public notice warning residents that staff members will be visiting various properties to conduct water disconnections for outstanding payments on accounts.

"Municipality should sort their accounts out first before threatening to cut people off. They want to cut us off for not paying but don't want to help us to pay,” a disgruntled resident said.
 Another resident said she has a new connection from September but has not received an invoice to make payment.
 “No one can tell me what my account number is. I cannot make payment.  I have no idea what my average would be either to make some sort of payment,” she said.

 An Ugu resident who posted a comment on the Ugu Complaints Facebook page said she received the wrong water readings on her account which runs into thousands.
 “My account for October is R12937.12 and Ugu says my meter reading is 1215, but I have sent them a photograph of the correct meter reading for the 19 October which stands on 638. All they say is pay your estimated amount and they will correct the problem,” she said.
 George Henderson, ward councillor in the Ray Nkonyeni Municipality, said the municipality’s  accounting system is a “total mess of mass proportions”.

 “Most people have not received an account this year, while others received an account in February, then July with fictitious figures,” said Henderson.
 He said bulk users like complexes, gated estates and businesses cannot pay without an account in order to claim vat.
 “Many of the government departments are not paying because they have not received credible invoices which is required by the auditor general,” said Henderson.

 Ugu spokesperson France Zama said a debt recovery task team has been established to carry out the municipalities revenue collection strategy with a focus on billing issues and outstanding payments.
 “The municipality is also enforcing its credit control policy where water supply disconnections have been effected on properties with outstanding payments,” said Zama.
 He said the municipality urges all customers to make payments on their accounts to prevent water supply disconnections.

 “Those who may have disputes on their  received bills to contact our call centre on 0800092837 or (039) 6885830/36,” said Zama.
 karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury