Durban - “We are ready to host the millions of domestic and international tourists who flock to our shores to enjoy our warm weather, beautiful beaches and friendly people during the festive season.”
This was the statement made by eThekwini Municipality spokesperson, Msawakhe Mayisela, following an explosive feature by Carte Blanche on the incidents of violence and drug dealing along the beachfront. The insert further speaks of broken bottles used as crack pipes and heroin needles found lying along the beachfront.

Mayisela said the city has adopted an effective and constructive operational plan that includes establishing security measures and limiting the probability of critical incidents. 
She said hundreds of Metro Police officers are patrolling the streets daily. 
“The number of officers will be increased on busier days. As in previous years, these days have a larger influx of people at shopping complexes, beaches, nightclubs and other places,” she said. 
Related ArticlesMetro cops crack down on beach revellers
Mayisela said the safety and security of all visitors is a massive priority. 
She said the beachfront area is the city’s prime asset and they have made concerted efforts to ensure that the beaches remain in pristine condition all year round. 
For the last two weeks, areas along the beachfront have remained relatively clean and noise-free thanks to patrols by Metro Police.

Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs MEC Sihle Zikalala, said last year the province had 600 000 domestic visitors and 138 000 international tourists. However, the MEC was optimistic that for the 2018 festive season period the KwaZulu-Natal wanted to surpass this figure.
“My department was working on attracting no less than 850 000 domestic visitors and
150 000 international visitors a feat that will see R2.4 billion injected into the provincial economy,” he said. 

eThekwini mayor, Zandile Gumede, revealed that about 3, 8 million local and international visitors flock to the city annually. 
“For the 2018 Summer season which starts from 1st December 2018 and ends in February 2019, it is projected that 1.1 million visitors will set foot on Durban shores,” she said.
Daily News