Durban - Police have warned that security will be beefed up for the Telkom Knockout semi-final set to take place between Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates this weekend at the Moses Mabhida Stadium. 
KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson, Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said planning meetings have been going on between various safety and security stakeholders for the last few weeks.  

Zwane said police and other law enforcement officials will monitor the event and ensure that there is peace and stability. 
“Police officers and security personnel will be monitoring the grounds and surrounding areas to tackle the issue of the reselling of match tickets and fake ticket sales,” Zwane said.
Gates for the match will open at 12pm and the match will kick off at 3pm.  

For those who do not have tickets to the match at the stadium, they can attend the free Derby Public Viewing Area at New Beach (top of Dr Pixley ka Seme/West Street) from midday till 10pm. 
 
People coming to the stadium will be searched for any prohibited items and such will be confiscated. 

The public is warned of the following prohibited items:
-        No sharp instruments e.g. knives;
-        No firearms, No bottles;

-        No alcohol allowed inside the stadium.
 
Available Public Parking areas

Public parking areas around the stadium are available at R20: People’s Park East, Kings Park Swimming Pool and the Badminton Hall on Umgeni Road.
Other options: Suncoast Parking, Durban Station, Kings Park Stadium
Motorists are advised to come early to avoid congestion at the parking gates; make sure vehicles are locked properly, close all doors and windows; do not give car keys to any stranger or car guards and do not leave valuable goods in the car.

 
Traffic Management measures
Masabalala Yengwa Avenue will be closed in both directions from 11h00 until after the game around 18h00. Isaiah Ntshangase (Walter Gilbert) will be closed for traffic from 03h00 in the morning. Other road closure and diversions may occur from 10h00, amongst others at intersections in the Area/ block bounded by Umgeni road to west, Sandile Thusi (Argyle) on the South, Ruth First/M4 in the East, and Smiso Nqwanyana (Goble) road to the North. Motorists are warned to stay away from the area around the stadium if they do not have tickets to the game or proceed to the beachfront fan park. Road signage will be visible for parkings.

Daily News