Durban - A controversial business forum is behind the disruption and shutting down of the construction of an N2 Wild Coast bridge project in the Eastern Cape.
This is according to the police, who had to deal with armed protesters demanding jobs and business opportunities in the flagship project.

Sanral announced yesterday that work on the Mtentu bridge had to be stopped due to violent protests. 
Sanral said their workers and management had been threatened by people carrying assault rifles. 
SAPS spokesperson in the Eastern Cape, Mali Govender, said the police report showed that a forum from KwaZulu-Natal called the Federation for Radical Economic Transformation had been behind the protest. The national roads agency described the action by scores of protesters as “disruptive, threatening and intimidating”. 

For the past few days the community has been protesting, accusing Sanral and its implementing agents of failing to honour promises to provide jobs and source services from the community.
The protesters have received support from the Xolobeni community, which is embroiled in a bitter dispute over attempts by an Australian company to mine at the Wild Coast. 
“The community has been sidelined. We were promised jobs, but those never materialised. There are no business opportunities for locals. Even the building materials don’t come from this area.

“We cannot get close to their offices to deliver CVs because there is a security company called Zero Tolerance standing there with big guns. The community cannot walk freely in that area,” said Thwesha Silangwe of the Jama community, which is leading the protest against Sanral. 
He denied that there had been a violent protest, saying “people were just singing - there was no violence”.
Louw Kannemeyer, a Sanral engineering executive, said the protests over the past week were unacceptable.

“While locals have been employed, those who weren’t felt they should have been. There are only so many jobs per contract, which unfortunately means that not every unemployed person can be accommodated. Sanral cannot condone hooliganism and aggression as a means of demanding who must be given jobs.”
He said work on the bridge had to be halted as Sanral took the safety of its contractors and labourers very seriously. 
“Disruptions that stop work on site affect the critical path of the project and delay the completion date. On a project of this magnitude, these disruptions cost the economy several hundred thousand rand a day,” said Kannemeyer.

Sanral called on the Eastern Cape authorities to address these violent acts.
The secretary-general of the forum, Robert Ndlela, said they were unhappy at how Sanral had shared opportunities.
“Sanral must admit that they, in their planning, never factored in the participation of black people in the project.

“The locals are being denied even the opportunities of labour, never mind the business opportunities, and that is why we had to take this step. We are not happy about the work stoppage because it also has an impact on the work done by the small number of locals. We want fruitful negotiations,” said Ndlela. 
The Mercury