Durban - A 38-year old pastor who began working at John Wesley Primary School 12 years ago as an assistant boarding master and cleaner has recently been hired as a teacher at the same independent Christian school in Pinetown. 
Mthokozisi Makhanya said teaching found him more than he went out looking for it because his original plan was to become a counselling psychologist. 

He said his potential to become a teacher was discovered by former principal Helen Birchall while visiting a colleague who had lost her husband.
“They asked me to share the word of God there and former principal Helen Birchall identified me and asked if I would be interested in pursuing a career as an educator and of course I said yes,” he said.
Born in Eshowe, Makhanya moved to KwaMashu 14 years ago to find work and began preaching at a small church called God’s Own Church International based in Inanda. 

He said the church was too small to support him and two years later he found an additional job at the school.
“When the boarding facility closed down, the school gave me a job as a photocopier for the whole school and they continued paying me my salary,” said Makhanya. 
Makhanya said Birchall approached the school board after identifying his potential and they agreed to fund his studies at UNISA. 

“The qualification took me six years because I had to do a bridging course first,” he said. 
Makhanya is now qualified to teach Mathematics, Life Skills, Computer Studies, iSizulu and English at intermediate and senior phase.
“I started in July as a full time teacher. I teach Maths and Life skills to L-sen pupils who have difficulty understanding concepts and I also teach computers to the entire foundation phase including grade 4,” he said. 

Makhanya - whose wife works at the school as a general assistant and whose two children attend the school - said the principle which has always lived by throughout his life is to “do your job to the best of your ability.” 
“I believe that when one does something, they have to do it so well that anyone who sees it will be impressed,”he said.
Lilian Corden-Lloyd, marketing manager of John Wesley School in Pinetown said  Mthokozisi has worked incredibly hard, achieving distinctions in many of his subjects.

“Mthokozisi became a fully qualified teacher in June this year.  It just so happens that a full time teaching position opened up at the school and he is now officially teaching at the school he originally started working for as a cleaner 12 years ago,” she said.
 karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury