Durban - Eggs from Finchley Farms Barn Eggs, named in an incident of salmonella poisoning in the Hillcrest area,  have been cleared of any link to  contaminants.

 

 Independent lab tests showed the eggs were not the cause of salmonella infection that had resulted in seven members of two families falling ill after eating a dessert made of uncooked eggs during a potjie
  cook-off.

 

 Rowan Holt, of Finchley Farms Barn Eggs, said: “The salmonella test results obtained on the egg pulp and shell (used in the dessert) were all negative. With regards to the potjie
  competition situation, I was contacted by the store manager, where our eggs are on sale, and told about a situation where people had become ill and one of the ingredients in the dish suspected of causing this illness to some poor folk was eggs purchased from his store. 

 

 “I immediately made contact with the lady who made the dish and I agreed to collect the remaining eggs and shell, which she had put aside for me, for testing. 
 This was done and the eggs were submitted to a certified lab. When the results became available eight days later, I sent a copy of these results to the lady and the store manager, and then communicated with both of them and they were both satisfied and grateful for the process followed and the results obtained.”

 

 Holt said that they had followed all protocols laid out in resolving the situation, and were
  totally above board and transparent at all times, in the face of negative publicity.

 

 “Finchley Farms Barn Eggs farming methods are the new world standard in cage free
 /barn egg production; our eggs are healthy and fresh and our business is ethical and transparent,” he said.

 

 While Busamed Hillcrest Private Hospital confirmed that the families that had eaten the dessert were treated at the hospital, and diagnosed with salmonella infection, the source of the salmonella had not been pinpointed.

 

 Tyrone Kerr, manager at the uMhlanga
  Spar, where the eggs for the dessert had been bought, said he was happy that the tests had come back negative, and he would continue to stock the product.

 

 “The team at Finchley handled the matter professionally,” he said.

 

 eThekwini Municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela confirmed that the test on the eggs was  negative. 

 

 “It must first be noted that much reference is currently being made to a salmonellosis outbreak. At this stage, it is best that the issue be
  referred to as an outbreak of food poisoning. 
 The laboratory results from the egg distributor have been reviewed by the health unit, which verified the statement that the batch tested was negative,” he said. 

 

 Mayisela said the department was fully engaged with each reported incident, with various interventions, samples and tests conducted.

 News of the families’ experiences followed soon after uMhlanga restaurant Old Town Italy was reported to have served hollandaise sauce, made with eggs that had salmonella.

 

 The Old Town Italy restaurant said on Facebook: "
 We can confirm the samples taken from our restaurant for the period 03 November 2018 to

 
09 November 2018 have tested positive for salmonella. However, it is important to highlight that the positive salmonella test results were limited to the hollandaise sauce, rocket and egg mix only. We are extremely pleased and relieved to confirm that all additional food items, surface swabs and equipment swabs have come back negative with zero traces of salmonella".


 The provincial health department and eThekwini Municipality confirmed that salmonella was present and said they would monitor and inspect the premises.

 

 Independent On Saturday