Durban - Denis Hurley was a fine administrator who enjoyed desk work. He relished the opportunity for research in preparation for scholarly addresses or papers and was an eloquent speaker, though he had little time to do much preparation.
As he got older, he saw that the gift of being present and standing in solidarity with those in need or under attack, because of their work for justice, was perhaps more important. 

When an appeal came to him to visit places of suffering and persecution, he would readily set aside whatever he might have been doing. Or the appeal might have come from church workers witnessing to the Gospel of Christ as was the case with the Open Schools’ debacle. 
Hurley played a leading role in negotiations with the government to allow church schools to be open to children of all races, but in those negotiations he was always firm about the supremacy of conscience. Marist Brother Jude Pieterse praised Hurley for always being willing to change his plans, so that he could support the struggle of those who were convinced that the schools should be open to all and bravely implemented that on the ground.
Letter to P Jansen, minister of national education, on November 21:

“For many years the Catholic Church in South Africa has found it extremely difficult to reconcile the Gospel message with the policy of apartheid and its implementation. Over the years the questioning of what had become acceptable in the daily lives of most white South Africans increased. More and more people began to examine daily practice in the light of the Gospel.
“To what extent is one bound by a law, which to one’s own conscience appears contrary to the law of God? The position of the schools in the Transvaal continues to be one of grave concern to all associated with them. 
“Regrettably, a situation has arisen in which the schools find themselves faced with having to make a choice between listening to human authority and obeying what they interpret to be the call of the Gospel. In conscience, those responsible for the schools have no option, but to do what seems to them to be in accordance with the teachings of our Lord and to be prepared to accept the consequences. The position is as serious as that.”

Hurley founds Diakonia:
“In the early 1970s, Denis Hurley was acutely aware that black impatience with apartheid called for a dynamic response from the churches. From 1974 to 1976 he carefully laid the foundations for “Diakonia”, a new organisation he founded to bring Durban churches together in a new effort to build a more just society.
“Encouraged by Vatican II’s emphasis on the importance of ecumenism he worked with the leaders of eight main churches to establish Diakonia. He realised that welfare, development and liberation should be mainstreamed as an integral part of church life; also that no church should do on its own what could be done with others, and that Christian service or Diakonia offered the best opportunity for inter-church collaboration. 

He was also keen that this new organisation to rally the Christian churches, should actively engage with people from the great world religions. There was much that could be done together with them as well.
“Diakonia has done much work on housing, detention without trial, conscientious objection, economic justice and poverty, worker rights and unemployment, education for democracy and promoting gender and environmental justice. 
“Diakonia’s annual silent procession carrying a cross through the streets of central Durban at dawn on Good Friday, has become a major feature of city life. Because so much of Diakonia’s work is about suffering people, the annual commemoration of Christ’s death and resurrection gives new impetus and understanding to all Diakonia’s work.”

Letter from Desmond Tutu, dated April 7, 1983:
Denis Hurley wasn’t only concerned about ecumenical work in the city of Durban, but throughout South Africa. This was why he came to the aid of the SA Council of Churches (SACC) when it was undergoing the rigorous scrutiny of the Eloff Commission which had been established to destroy the SACC.
Desmond Tutu expresses his gratitude to Denis Hurley for his public support for the SACC when they were facing this onslaught. Later the Khotso House headquarters of the SACC were deliberately destroyed by the regime. 

 “I write you on the other side of Calvary, as we celebrate the victory of our blessed Lord and Saviour over the fell powers of hell, death and destruction. It has all been so appropriate as we have experienced the peculiar Passion and Calvary of the Eloff Commission and know that whatever may befall us, Easter and the Resurrection are assured. Nothing will separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
 “I write utterly inadequately to thank you for your stout Christian witness before the Eloff Commission. You came at very great personal inconvenience and at your own expense and stood by the SACC at its hour of greatest need, humanly speaking. 
“In the South African context when it would have been much easier and more comfortable to do the opposite, you have stood up and been counted as you spoke out for the truth as you know it. We are deeply indebted to you. You have in unequivocal terms said this is your Council and you stand by it and support it as you show your commitment to it.”

Hurley’s Praise for Beyers Naudé dated May 22, 1995:
Hurley had high praise for Dr Beyers Naudé. Born in 1915, both died in 2004.
“Belatedly now I send you my congratulations on your 80th birthday, and express with the greatest warmth and affection all my admiration for you and all my deep gratitude for the part you played in South Africa over the past 40 years. 

“You were one of the providential people raised up by God to give a clear and convincing and self-sacrificing Christian witness. It has been a pleasure and inspiration knowing you, and the magnificent way your Christian faith motivated your courageous witness.” 

Copies of the book can be obtained from Paddy Kearney. Call 0312013832 or email: pkearney@saol.com. 

The Mercury