Durban - The Durban University of Technology’s head of enterprise development has been appointed as the research chairperson of the Digitisation for the Banking Sector Education and Training Authority (Bankseta).
In a statement on the DUT website, the university said Dr Colin Thakur, who is also the director and head of the e-Skills CoLab, would start his new role immediately until October 2020. 
Professor Sibusiso Moyo, DUT’s research, innovation and engagement deputy vice-chancellor, congratulated Thakur and said the appointment was a vote of confidence for the strides the university was making in the banking sector. 
“It means that we are thinking about being part of the change we want to see especially around the fourth industrial revolution (4IR), the opportunities it brings with it and the skills that we require to ensure our citizens are able to cope and become versatile producers and users of technologies and knowledge generated,” said Moyo. 
Thakur said he had envisaged an administrative role would stifle his academic career. 
“Strangely enough my academic output seems to have grown. I’m proud to do this wearing the DUT cap because I think it is important that we recognise the value and impact that DUT has in our lives from a reputation and prestige point of view,” he said.
“We know that we are moving between the digital world, biological world and the physical world, which we even term the cyber-physical world. We constantly get excited and fearful over robotics. So the question that we have to ask ourselves is; given all the changes that are happening now, how does 4IR affect the banking sector in general?” he said.
Thakur said the banking sector in South Africa was significantly strong and reputable. He said transitioning into the fourth industrial revolution required a focus on bridging the skills gap.
“The challenge that we have one of supply and demand, the universities are supposed to be supplying the skills required by the 4IR. The question that we need to ask ourselves as universities is; what have we done to change our output to meet the needs of the 4IR, and to meet the needs of the banking sector or any other sector? 
“What have we done differently in the last 10 years to our curriculum that speaks to the 4IR?” he asked. 
DUT Vice-Chancellor and Principal, Professor Thandwa Mthembu said the research must be viewed as a ‘feed forward’ project. 
“It will take feedback from technology and feed this forward to inform our strategy within the skills sector. I also urge the team to innovatively examine the unbanked with sensitivity and urgency,” said Mthembu.
Daily News