Durban - eThekwini Municipality has been lauded by the Premier Soccer League (PSL) for the city’s hosting of the Telkom Knockout semi-final match between Orlando Pirates and Kaizer Chiefs at the weekend.
A letter from PSL chief operating officer, Professor Ronnie Schloss, which was read out and distributed to members at the city’s executive committee meeting on Tuesday, praised the city for its handling of the logistics around the match and the public viewing areas.

“I believe the introduction of the fan parks was a great success in that it kept a lot of people who did not have tickets away from the stadium and this resulted in no major problems being experienced,” Schloss says in the letter.
“Traffic to and from the stadium was extremely well managed and no complaints have been received from the public, which is welcome”.
The news that the city was to host the fan parks attracted controversy last week when it emerged that R3.6million was to be spent on these.

The beachfront fan park attracted the most controversy after it emerged that the city had budgeted R3m for it.
Phillip Sithole, deputy city manager for economic development and planning, told The Mercury after the meeting that while the city had not yet seen the invoices, he believed the amount spent on the fan parks would not even reach R3m.
He said because of the enthusiasm soccer lovers had shown for the fan parks even ahead of the event, it was decided to increase the number of fan parks in townships.

“Initially, there were three venues but we decided to increase them, due to the demand. The PSL had announced these on their platforms and this generated interest. We were informed that there were people coming in minibus taxis who did not have tickets,” he said.
Sithole said the costs breakdown could not be provided publicly at that time as the municipality was still going to negotiate with the event organisers, who had partnered with the city to host these fan parks.
Sibusiso Zondi, senior marketing manager of Durban Tourism, said the event had served to market the city. 

He said eThekwini had received a media reach of 35.6million people, which translated to a public relations value of R106m.
According to Zondi, the fan park at the beachfront attracted about 15 000 people, while those in the townships attracted about 13 000. This generated revenue for township establishments that hosted the public viewing areas. Eyadini Lounge in uMlazi received an estimated spend of R1m, Max’s Lifestyle R900 000, Sbu’s Lounge R500 000 and Artizen Lounge R450 000.
The Mercury