Durban - The battle over the proposed amendment to the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation is headed to court.
The emotive topic has seen heated debates in Parliament, on social media and at public hearings, with opposition parties complaining last week that they were not happy with how the Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) had dealt with some submissions.

Civil rights group AfriForum announced that it had filed an urgent high court bid to halt some of the parliamentary processes leading up to the amendment of Section 25.
However, Parliament said that it intended to oppose the application.
In its papers filed in the Western Cape High Court, AfriForum asks the court to set aside a decision of the CRC to adopt a report that recommended the amendment of Section 25 of the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation.

The organisation also wants the court to stop the CRC from submitting the report to the two houses of Parliament. 
If the application succeeds, it would lead to delays in the finalisation of the matter, which was expected to be concluded after next year’s elections.
AfriForum says the report was flawed and had failed to take into consideration hundreds of thousands of written submissions on the issue.

“The applicant is aware that more than 100000 people used its electronic platform for purposes of making their written submissions to the CRC. These individuals therefore participated in the proceedings of the ad hoc committee but their submissions were excluded,” AfriForum states in its court papers.
The organisation says that about 180000 of the 630000 written submissions received by Parliament were excluded from the final analysis which formed the main basis of the report used to justify the amendment of the Constitution.
This was after the service provider tasked with analysing the written submissions had found that these were “duplicate” submissions.

AfriForum says such an action is an infringement of the constitutional rights of the people who made those submissions.
“While it is not suggested that each of these submissions needs to be considered individually, since they are similarly worded, it is at least required that they be considered and form part of the analysis of public participation. 
“They should be reflected in the statistics of those opposed to the amendment of Section 25 of the Constitution. The reported percentage of 65% being opposed to such an amendment would go up significantly.” 

AfriForum further accuses the CRC of abdicating its powers by allowing a third party to assess the written submissions, saying that the committee had been mandated by Parliament to gauge public sentiment through the public participation process.
While Parliament is expected to file an answering affidavit later today, in a statement yesterday it said it would oppose the application.
Parliament said the adoption of the report supporting the amendment of the Constitution followed an “extensive series of public hearings from June26 to August4”.

“Thousands of South Africans came to these hearings held in the nine provinces,” said Moloto Mothapo, Parliament’s spokesperson.
Speaking to The Mercury, AfriForum deputy chief executive Ernst Roets said his organisation had in the recent past written to Parliament to point out irregularities in the process and to warn of possible court action if it was not addressed.
He believed that the warnings were ignored because the EFF and the ANC were “hell-bent on ensuring an outcome that suits their agenda”.

Roets added that without irregularities in the process, the report would have shown that the majority of participants did not support the amendment of the Constitution.
The Mercury