Durban - With only two weeks to go until KZN’s newest and freshest 5km experience, it’s as if Christmas itself is just around the corner! The excitement is building as fans gather their tekkies and their Santa suits in preparation for a fun day out with the whole family at the 2018 Santa Run, powered by The Hub.
On Sunday the 25th of November, the fields of the Jonsson Kings Park Stadium will come alive with the sounds of happy children, live music and a whole lot of festive cheer as thousands of Durbanites take part in an exciting 5km route with 9 different activities and experiences along the way. 

Participants will make their way in and around the Kings Park precinct at their own pace - including through the infamous Sharks change room and the tunnel leading participants out onto the fields of dreams, where many of the world’s best rugby players and musicians have performed. But that’s not all… 
Trot along to the unique beats of award-winning percussionist Bryan Clarke and his musically gifted steel drum and African marimba bands, as their lively tunes fill the stadium corridors. Dive through giant inflatables, jog through a tunnel of lights, stop for refreshments along the way and take a picture with Sharkie or your favourite Sharks player. 
Then finish in style, and covered in snow, as you cross the 5km finish line, before enjoying all the other attractions on offer at this year’s Santa Run.

While you’re strolling around the Crafty Christmas Fair discovering delightful gifts, décor and treats, you’ll be entertained by MC Jane Linley-Thomas, while East Coast Radio’s Gordon Graham broadcasts live from the fields of the Jonsson Kings Park Stadium. 
Catch Durban’s talented drummer and singer songwriter Mike Wagner, who has performed alongside the likes of Ard Matthews, Jeremy Loops and Prime Circle, as he performs his LIVE acoustic set. Let the kids brush up on their sporting skills with the reputable Garvz Sports Academy, for some awesome fun and games. The little ones can try their hand at supervised cricket, rugby or soccer, as well as an obstacle course and a mini Olympics, all run by the team of professional and qualified Garvz coaches. In addition, a fun-filled Kids Inflatable Play Area will be available to everyone free of charge.
Follow the Santa Run on Facebook and stand a chance to win tickets for the whole family, as well as other awesome family prizes, such as a R1000 voucher from The Kid Zone. Plus, there will be spot prizes on the day for the best dressed Santa.

The Santa Run takes place on Sunday the 25th of November at the Jonsson Kings Park Stadium in Durban. It is open to people of all ages and fitness levels, and is by no means a competitive race. So trade in your racing shoes for your Santa Hat – which you’ll receive in your race pack, along with a R50 voucher to use online when you purchase something from www.thekidzone.co.za. 
The first 1000 participants through the gate will also receive a specialised Christmas cracker filled with something exciting. Tickets for The Santa Run are available via webtickets.co.za starting from R80, and parking on the day is safe, secure and FREE to all entrants! For more information please visit www.thesantarun.co.za.
Daily News