Durban - An application for the right to prospect for iron ore and zircon near the protected iSimangaliso Wetland Park World Heritage Site has been met with vigorous opposition.
The objectors say that the indigenous Sokhulu Forest directly abutting iSimangaliso’s boundary - and within which the proposed prospecting area is located - had already been earmarked for inclusion into the wetland park.

This is because of a 2011 proclamation by former president Jacob Zuma, when 500 hectares of land was transferred from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to the Department of Environmental Affairs to be incorporated into the World Heritage Site.
No mention was made of this in the draft basic assessment report (BAR) and draft environmental management programme report compiled for the prospecting rights applicant, Eyamakhosi Resources (Pty) Ltd, said Andrew Zaloumis, director of Wild Equity Foundation, in his official submission.
It was one of several flaws and omissions in the draft BAR, Zaloumis said, going on to urge the applicant to abandon the plan or that it be refused by the Department of Mineral Resources on the basis that the area was recognised for its ecological and biodiversity importance.

It is home to a number of endangered butterfly and bird species, including the white-winged flufftail, one of the world’s rarest birds.
Zaloumis, former chief executive officer of iSimangaliso, argued that prospecting and mining would leave visible scars for years to come and would imperil community-based tourism investment opportunities in the proposed prospecting area. People had until last week to lodge submissions as part of the public participation process.
Eyamakhosi Resources, a historically-disadvantaged local business, wants to prospect at a site 25km east of Mtubatuba. The company’s director is named in documents as Sicebi Mthethwa of Richards Bay.

Other objections have been lodged by the KZN branch of the Wildlife and Environmental Society of South Africa and the Game Rangers’ Association of Africa. 
The Nkwenyana Water Scheme (Pty) Ltd, a privately-registered scheme which provides a municipal service to the residents of Mfolozi village, said in its submission that it would be in the direct area of the proposed mining fallout. 
Cally Kirkwood, for the scheme, said the consultation process had been inadequate and the applicant’s water usage would compromise its supply.

Zaloumis said in his submission that it was clear the BAR failed to take into consideration the conservation status and ecological sensitivities of the area. 
There was a lack of information about the proposed prospecting activity, including the size of the drilling sites and their precise location.
The width of the access roads required for the rig to get to each of the drilling sites and the extent of the area that had to be cleared for operations had not been specified.

The Mercury