Durban - Major shopping malls in Durban are gearing up for the Black Friday shopping rush by reinforcing security and employing additional staff to cater for the crowds.
Some major anchor stores will begin trading at midnight tonight to give customers a head start. 

Black Friday and the Cyber Monday that follows it represent an opportunity for South Africans to take advantage of many excellent deals in time for Christmas. 
But shoppers are warned not to spend money they don’t have and to be extra vigilant with their belongings. 


 



Some shopping centres, like The Pavilion, have offered free parking all day and complimentary wi-fi, along with dedicated Pavilion brand ambassadors to assist shoppers around the centre. 
Pavilion marketing manager Julie-Anne Zuma said there was a renewed sense of the overall manner consumers and retailers view Black Friday.

“Macro-economic factors are certainly influencing the uptake and mass participation that is normally associated with this day. Consumers are becoming wiser in terms of their spend allocation, and they do so with an increased amount of savvy and discernment,” Zuma said.
Gateway mall management have worked closely with large national retailers to ensure queues are managed properly. 
Speed fencing will be set up outside stores to ensure smooth access, while some stores will limit the number of shoppers who enter their stores at any given time. 

Additional staff, such as security and cleaners, will be brought in to keep operations running smoothly.
Gateway’s official trading hours for Black Friday are 9am to 9pm. However, some stores will open their doors at midnight and trade late into tomorrow evening.
Gateway general manager Akash Maharaj said there were many not-to-be-missed offers this Black Friday.

“As always this is a busy shopping day, so patrons are encouraged to be patient and tolerant while shopping. We look forward to an exciting kick-off to the 2018 festive season this Black Friday and seeing happy customers with full trolleys,” Maharaj said.
Galleria mall marketing manager Anusha Timul said all necessary security precautions had been taken, which included the SAPS, metro police and private security that would be on site. 
Timul said they had held meetings with major tenants to ensure safety plans were in place.

The Mercury