Durban - The Department of Education should prioritise school safety by increasing police involvement in the day to day safety protocols at schools to ensure a safe environment for teachers and pupils.
That was the message from Nobuhle Shezi, who was one of the winners at the KwaZulu-Natal teacher awards held at the Royal Showgrounds in Pietermaritzburg. 

Shezi, a teacher at Nkanyiso Special Needs School in Vryheid, came first in the special needs category for her presentation on understanding pupils with special needs and finding the best ways to educate them according to their strengths. 
“It is important that the department link up the schools, not just with police stations, but with individual police officers who come to the schools regularly and randomly, so that we have someone to call when there is a problem.
“We are female teachers, and because some of our pupils have severe disabilities, they can get aggressive and injure you without realising it,” she said.

Shezi said she was pleased with her award and that it was in recognition of the work that she and other teachers at her school were doing. 
Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwana said it was important to bring back the spirit of ubuntu in the teaching profession.
He said the awards aimed to honour dedicated, creative and effective teachers and schools, and encourage teachers to go beyond the call of duty.

“I have personal experience of how teachers were respected by society. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case. We need to revive that spirit of ubuntu by being true to our vocation.
“It is still true that teaching is a calling. We, teachers, need to conduct ourselves as people who have been called to serve the nation. We must live an exemplary life, and ensure that we inspire many to aspire to be teachers tomorrow,” he said.
Dlungwana said teacher's jobs had expanded to virtually include the work of social work, dealing with social challenges that include HIV/Aids, substance abuse, diversity and gender sensitivity.

“This means that the challenges of our society call upon our teachers to be more than just teachers. Sometimes they find themselves having to be social workers, psychologists and many other professions,” he said.
The Mercury