Durban - The eThekwini Municipality will spend about R3.6million on four public viewing areas set up to accommodate soccer lovers who cannot make it to Moses Mabhida stadium on Saturday.
Arch-rivals Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates will face off in the semi-finals of the Telkom Knockout.

The plan was tabled before the city’s executive committee (Exco) meeting on Tuesday, where it was revealed that the main public viewing area at New Beach will cost R3m. The other three at popular establishments in uMlazi, KwaMashu and Clermont townships will cost a combined R625000.
The stadium is expected to be packed to capacity. 
Phillip Sithole, the deputy city manager responsible for economic development, said the city established through the Premier Soccer League that scores of supporters from Gauteng were planning to come to Durban irrespective of whether they had tickets or not. According to the report tabled at Exco, the fan parks are expected to draw about 30000 visitors, while the stadium will accommodate 55000 spectators. 

The match is expected to attract about 35000 out-of-town visitors with a “projected spend of approximately R40m”.
The opposition said they were not happy with the high cost associated with the beachfront venue. 
They also took issue with the fact that some of the businesses that will host the township fan parks will still charge entrance fees on the day.

Nicole Graham, the leader of the DA caucus in the city, raised concerns, saying while her party supports the idea, they were concerned the numbers “seem to be a bit jazzed up”.
“It will come to about R200000 per township fan park, which I think is a reasonable amount and is a nice investment in those areas. But when it comes to the New Beach fan park, it is going to cost R3m. R3m is such a large amount for one fan park for one day, when it is clear we can do it a lot cheaper,” Graham said.
She also argued that because public money was used for these fan parks, members of the public should be able to walk into those areas free of charge.

Mdu Nkosi of the IFP raised similar concerns, pointing out that the report lacked crucial details.
The DA’s Heinz de Boer said he had thought the township fan parks were going to be at public spaces so people could freely walk in and watch the match.
Justifying the projected expenditure on the beachfront fan park, Sithole said, unlike at the township establishments where there is already infrastructure, the beachfront will require infrastructure to be set up.

Mondli Mthembu, one of the ANC representatives at Exco, said the lack of detail in the report could be due to time constraints.