Durban - News that the condition of Durban’s historic City Hall requires millions of rand in terms of repairs and upgrades is not surprising given its age, and the fact that concerns about its construction were a major issue when it was being built.
Durban’s first Town Hall opened in 1885. But the accelerated growth of the city was such that within 20 years it was felt a larger civic centre was required. 

On the initiative of Durban mayor Ellis Brown, the process towards that end commenced at a council meeting held on September 16, 1904. 
A firm of architects, Scott, Woollacoot and Hudson, was tasked to design and prepare a plan on the basis of which tenders could be invited. 
It was speculated that the cost of what the Natal Witness called “Durban’s Civic Palace” would be in the vicinity of £320000.

Basic details of what was envisaged were made public at a council meeting on March6, 1905. The design was inspired by the city hall in Belfast, Northern Ireland. 
The new hall was to be 60% larger than the existing one in terms of floor space; it would have the capacity to accommodate 3500 people and an orchestra pit large enough for 200 musicians. 
In that the edifice would include a library, museum, art gallery and municipal offices, it would be a true civic centre.

Interest in the project was considerable and attracted 22 tenders. 
But from the outset the issue was whether the exterior construction should be entirely of stone or part stone and part cement plaster. Inevitably, costs influenced tender selection. 
The top quote for stone only was £467595 and, therefore, was disregarded. At its meeting held on May22, 1905, the council settled on the lowest quote of £237945 from architect Stanley Hudson for a stone exterior up to the first storey, and plaster cement for the upper floors.

But immediately another issue arose. A deputation from trade unions wanted to know the extent to which local craftsmen and labour would benefit from the project, and details about fair wages. 
Brown conceded that tenders had been called without the insertion of a clause concerning wages. He also conceded that most, if not all, of the materials and made-up joinery would be imported from the UK. 
In an exasperated tone, he warned that “any idea of raising (those) questions now would mean the cancellation of all the tenders”.

The foundation stone was laid on February27, 1906, by the Duke of Connaught.
On January19, 1907, The Mercury published a large sketch of the envisaged Durban City Hall. The sketch had been on display at the 1906 Royal Academy Exhibition in London. However, that publication engendered a new controversy: the nature of the exterior construction. 
There was a school of thought that wanted the entire exterior to be of stone construction, and argued that in order to keep within budget, the Smith Street side of the building could be stopped at the first storey, temporarily roofed and that the proposed domes on the roof could be omitted.

A meeting of Durban architects protested strongly against completing the upper floors of the City Hall in plaster cement. 
The design, they said, called for solid stone exterior construction.
In an editorial published on January28, 1907, The Mercury endorsed the stance of the architects, declaring that a combination of stone and plaster would be “hideous” and an eyesore to future generations.

Significantly, The Mercury echoed the concerns of the architects, pointing out that upkeep of the greater portion of the building in cement would require costly regular maintenance. 
That very situation now confronts the eThekwini Metro. 
Despite the informed opinion of the architects, the council subsequently decided to persist with the plan of part stone and part plaster. 

In its editorial of February 8, 1907, The Mercury accused the council of perpetrating a great blunder.
Nonetheless, amid great fanfare, the Durban City Hall was officially opened on April12, 1910 in what The Mercury described as a red-letter day for Durban. Its final cost was £347000. 
The original Town Hall was sold to the government and became Durban’s General Post Office.


Duncan Du Bois is a post- doctoral researcher.
The Mercury