Durban - The Department of Home Affairs has advised new mothers to be extra vigilant and only seek the assistance of designated health officials at all times.
This comes after two male fraudsters, who had official Home Affairs name tags, attempted to collect mothers from Addington Hospital with their newborns under the guise of registering and issuing birth certificates last month.

Paseka Mokhethea spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs said his department and the department of Health have collaborated in a programme to register children at health facilities after birth.
“Home Affairs officials deployed form part of the staff complement of that particular health institution. It is for this reason that the health official was able to recognise the rogue officials and alert the law enforcement,” he said.
 The sister on duty refused to release the mothers with their babies without an official letter of confirmation.

 Reports indicate that the nurse was alerted to the fact that the men were imposters when they were unable to produce the letter and left which caused her to raise the alarm.
 Mokhethea commended the health officials at the hospital for their vigilance while ensuring the safety of the newborn babies and their mothers.
 “The relations between Home Affairs and Health departments continue to strengthen in a bid to ensure the early registration of birth and thereby upholding the integrity of the National Population Register,” he said.

 In terms of the legislation, added Mokhethea, a child must be registered within 30 days of birth.
 “A parent, guardian or any other person legally responsible for the child may register the child at a Home Affairs office. In this instance, the office will be located at a health facility. A birth certificate will be issued thereafter,” he said.
 Ncumisa Mafunda, spokesperson for the KwaZulu-Natal department of Health confirmed that the matter was reported to the Department of Home Affairs.

 “The Department does have a security system at the hospital. Furthermore, the Department would like to exercise its right not to comment further on security matters,” she said.
 karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury