Johannesburg - EFF leader Julius Malema has hinted that the DA may lose one of the metropolitan municipalities it runs because of its "racist behaviour" in Parliament on Tuesday. 

 

 Malema tweeted on Wednesday afternoon:  "I think @Our_DA should be punished for their racist behaviour in parliament yesterday by taking one metro away from them."

 

 His comments can be seen as retaliation following a scuffle between DA MPs and EFF MPs during President Cyril Ramaphosa's question and answer session in Parliament on Tuesday.
Related ArticlesRamaphosa confirms son received payment from embattled Bosasa#RamaphosaQandA: I will take my son to jail if guilty, says RamaphosaLIVE: Ramaphosa answers questions on VBS scandal#RamaphosaQandA: 'None of us can be proud about what happened'#RamaphosaQandA: War of words between MPs ends in clashes at Parliament#RamaphosaQandA: 'Selling SAA not an option'EFF wants Gigaba to be sent packing over Fireblade VVIP terminalNo more secret meetings for ANC leaders, says MagashuleRamaphosa confirms son received payment from embattled Bosasa#RamaphosaQandA: I will take my son to jail if guilty, says RamaphosaLIVE: Ramaphosa answers questions on VBS scandal#RamaphosaQandA: 'None of us can be proud about what happened'1234
 

 Another scuffle also broke out between an EFF MP Nazier Paulsen and an Agang MP Andries Tlouamma.  

 

 

 



 

 In the first instance, EFF MPs and DA MPs charged towards each other after DA chief whip John Steenhuisen called EFF MPs "VBS looters" following an interruption from EFF benches. 

 

 EFF leader Julius Malema responded by calling Steenhuisen 'racist'. 

 

 House chair Thoko Didiza struggled to keep the House in order as EFF members chanted "racists" while pointing fingers towards DA MPs, while DA MPS chanted "pay back the money" towards EFF MPs. 

 

 Calm was finally restored a few minutes after the incidents. 

 

 This is not the first time that the EFF has threatened to punish the DA. 

 

 Earlier this year, the party took the decision to help remove former Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip. This was after the DA decided not to vote with the EFF on expropriation of land. 

 

 The DA runs a number of municipalities with the help of opposition parties like the EFF. Joburg metro and Tshwane are governed by the DA with the help of opposition parties. 

 

 IOL