Durban -Beach revellers had their weekend antics curtailed by a metro police crackdown on littering, noise pollution and late-night parties.
The control measures, intended to make the Golden Mile attractive to and safe for visitors, will continue throughout the festive season.

Metro police have restricted access to the popular Durban Country Club beach, which is known for parties that often leave the area strewn with litter and broken bottles. Videos of the aftermath of those beach parties often go viral on social media, upsetting locals.

 


Metro police spokesperson senior superintendent Parboo Sewpersad said operations would intensify as the festive season drew closer.
“Last weekend there were two matches at the Moses Mabhida Stadium, and the crowd spilled over from there to the beach. We will be picking up the pace and setting up more crowd-control measures,” he said.

Sewpersad said officers would conduct stop-and-search operations to clamp down on alcohol abuse at beaches this festive season. He said metro police would also focus on illegal parking and by-law violations.
“We want this to serve as a warning to all beach-goers that we will be enforcing the by-laws. If people do not toe the line they could be arrested or issued with a hefty fine.
“We will be stationed at all entrance and exit points along the beachfront and alcohol will be confiscated. People will be issued with a receipt which they can use to get their alcohol back upon leaving the beachfront,” he said.

Metro police head Steve Middleton said the operations would take place each weekend as a proactive means of keeping the area safe and ensuring that people adhered to by-laws.
The DA caucus leader in eThekwini, councillor Nicole Graham, said there had been a devastating mess along Durban beachfront over the past few weekends.
“It is important that we get a hold on this before the festive season and make sure there is ongoing enforcement. We need to do this to attract and maintain tourists and investment. We will continue to engage metro police to ensure there is stringent enforcement against those who do not adhere to the rules,” Graham said.

A local cyclist, who asked to remain anonymous, said it was a pleasure to be able to cycle without having to dodge litter and broken beer bottles.
“The beachfront area is used by most of the cycle clubs as their starting and finishing point for rides,” he said.
Last month, the city lambasted those who littered on the beachfront.

“We want to remain a friendly city. We condemn the littering and appeal to visitors and residents to be responsible for their own waste,” said eThekwini municipal manager Sipho Nzuza. “Among the things we will embark on are educational campaigns on the significance of cleanliness.”
He said traffic to the beachfront would be controlled to guard against people smuggling alcohol to the beach.
“Minibus taxis are going to be parked at a holding area with occupants required to walk to the beach. Even the holding area will be closely monitored to ensure litter is disposed of in the bins available.

The Mercury