Durban - MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube, has ordered an investigation into corruption within the Mpofana Municipality. Dube-Ncube asked for the investigation following claims of irregularities, fraud and corruption at the council. 
The MEC tabled an explosive forensic investigation on Monday.

"I have today assigned a team of senior officials to table the report to the Mpofana council. The council has been given 21 days within which to table the report before full council, deal with specific details contained in the report and thereafter report to the MEC for Cogta on the remedial actions," said Dube-Ncube.
She said the forensic report tabled revealed shocking allegations by municipal officials entrusted with the responsibility to translate policy programmes into tangible service delivery initiatives. 
“The report contains damning allegations and we have instructed the Mpofana council to take swift action based on our recommendations and ensure that such transgressions are not repeated," said Dube-Ncube.

She explained that the actions should involve civil recoveries, criminal proceedings and disciplinary processes against all those implicated in this report. 
“It is very disappointing to observe that officials, instead of being servants of the people and putting the interest of the community first, have been involved in massive acts of self-enrichment at the expense of the municipality. We want the Mpofana council to ensure harsh consequences for all those implicated, including criminal and civil recoveries if they have jumped ship before being hauled to account,” said Dube-Ncube.
KZN Cogta investigates all instances of fraud, corruption and maladministration in municipalities that are reported to it and the department's reports on forensic investigations are formally presented to the relevant municipal councils with recommendations to be implemented by these councils to rectify past and prevent future fraud, corruption and maladministration.

“We are committed to investigating all instances of wrongdoing, including fraud and corruption, in municipalities that are brought to our attention," said Dube-Ncube. 
The Mpofana Council through the Mayor Cllr Xolani Duma welcomed the report and vowed to implement it speedily to ensure that it marks a dawn of a new era of accountability and good governance.
The Mercury