Durban - Siam Lee’s mother, Carmen Lee, sobbed uncontrollably in the Durban Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday as the State revealed details of her daughter’s murder allegedly at the hands of an Assagay businessman.
The indictment read out by the prosecutor during the brief hearing revealed that the cause of her death was “haemorrhage from a head injury (and) 90% burns with charring tissue”.

The businessman is not being named as he also faces a separate charge of rape.
Lee told The Mercury it was the first time she had learnt that her daughter was burnt alive.
“I did not expect to hear it today so I was blindsided, but I needed to hear this at some point. 

“It was the most painful thing to hear Siam was burnt alive,” she said, sobbing.
Lee said she had been getting counselling at a local hospital, but was still battling to digest what had happened to her daughter.
The indictment set out how the accused had allegedly kidnapped Siam on January 4. 

“Although the accused was a previous client of the victim on or about January 4, she no longer wished to have any contact with the accused. 
“As a result of her conduct, the accused decided to kill her,” read the indictment.
The State alleges that the accused forced Siam into his Mercedes Vianno and sped off to his Assagay home. 

On the way, his vehicle collided with another. He did not stop, although the other driver gave chase.
The State alleged that he kept Siam at his house until about midnight, at which stage he decided to kill her.
“To this end, he forced her back into the Mercedes and set out for New Hanover in possession of petrol. On arrival in the vicinity of Smidtshoek Farm in the early hours of January 6, the accused removed the victim from the vehicle, threw her into a nearby sugar cane field, doused her with petrol and set her alight,” read the indictment. 

The State alleges she died at the scene.
The accused faces 16 counts including murder, kidnapping and the unlawful possession of a firearm and ammunition. He also faces a charge of raping another masseuse and crimen injuria.
The State alleges the rape occurred in March 2016. The accused allegedly arrived at the victim’s place of work in Escombe and forced her into his vehicle at gunpoint. He then drove to his Assagay home where he allegedly raped the victim. 

Other charges relate to the man’s alleged abusive relationship with a former fiancée. The matter will move to the Durban High Court on March 11. 
The Mercury