Durban - The Special Investigating Unit (SIU) has recommended that disciplinary action be taken against senior managers at Msunduzi Municipality after it was alleged that they irregularly approved a dodgy security contract that cost more than R250million in two years.
Criminal investigations related to financial misconduct have also been referred to the National Prosecuting Authority.

In a report to the city council last week, which The Mercury has seen, suspended city boss Sizwe Hadebe, the manager for community services Boniwe Zulu and former manager for sustainable development Ray Ngcobo were fingered as the top three involved in the alleged irregular dealings with Khuselani Security and Risk Management (KSA). 
Ngcobo is now the municipal manager for uMgungundlovu. 
According to the confidential report, they were found to have defied the Municipal Systems Act, the Municipal Finance Management Act and the municipality’s and national Treasury’s supply chain policies. 

Hadebe, Zulu and Ngcobo were found to have allegedly approved irregular contract extensions, made irregular payments and devised variation rates that were not in compliance with the regulations.
The report comes after the SIU was asked by the presidency in 2016 to investigate fraud, corruption and maladministration in the municipality. 
According to the report, Hadebe continued contracting KSA, “knowing full well that this entity had allegations of fraud levelled against it during its previous tenders”. 

The SIU said Hadebe’s actions resulted in “an enormous cost of about R9.4m a month to the municipality”.
Zulu, in her capacity as acting city manager in April 2016, is accused of directing Ngcobo to finalise and sign a service-level agreement between Msunduzi and KSA that irregularly extended and varied the contract rates the parties already had.
This, according to the report, rendered Zulu guilty of financial misconduct as her actions caused the municipality to incur irregular expenditure.

By facilitating the procurement “in a grossly negligent way”, Ngcobo is said to have allowed for KSA to be paid R251.9m between April 2016 and April this year.
In addition to the disciplinary action recommended against the three, the report also stated that one matter had been reported to the Department of Labour, four disciplinary matters against other officials had been prepared for handover to the municipality, and evidence packs against two municipal officials who resigned after being interviewed by the SIU would also be handed over. 
The final SIU report is yet to submitted to President Cyril Ramaphosa.

In a letter to The Mercury, Hadebe said he believed he had been “set up”. 
Hadebe questioned why the SIU did not cite others in the report, including Msunduzi’s acting municipal manager and chief financial officer (CFO) Nelisiwe Ngcobo. 
“All payments made to KSA were also approved by the CFO. Why has she not been cited?

“I will indicate that the report by the SIU seems to have ignored all material facts and discounted all the relevant information which might have helped it reach a different conclusion,” Hadebe said. 
He said he believed the SIU “did not assign adequate weight to some of the information provided”, and accused other municipal officials of manipulating the SIU to reach certain conclusions. 
He added that when he joined the municipality in 2016, he was told a task team had been negotiating the payment rates with KSA, and the parties reached an agreement that the rate would have to be increased from 78% to 96%. 

He said a former senior finance manager indicated that the task team originated as the result of a court order after KSA had taken the municipality to court.
“I learnt six months later that I was misled into believing that the rate negotiations were the result of a court process,” he said. 
Hadebe said he then proceeded to charge the manager concerned for misleading him. 

Calls and messages to Ngcobo went unanswered.
Zulu, in a text message, said: “The matter is between the SIU and the municipality. I would advise that you communicate with the municipality’s communications officer”.
Approached for comment, KSA’s sole director, Mohammed Yacoob, said he did not wish to comment on the SIU’s allegations as it related to matters that were in court. 

The company is currently involved in litigation with both the SIU and the city.
In May, the SIU applied for a high court order for KSA to pay back R554,8m lost by Msunduzi over its allegedly unlawful contracts. Alternatively, the SIU requested the company should pay the R158,9m it had allegedly overcharged the city.
This matter is being opposed by the company and is pending. 

In September, KSA took Msunduzi to court over the non-payment for services. The matter is still pending before the court.
Msunduzi spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said the city could not comment as the issue was subject to an SIU investigation and there were also court matters pending.
The Mercury