Durban - Funds, to the value of almost R4 million was donated to beneficiaries at a grant-in-aid event held at the Durban City Hall on Monday. 
Cheques were presented to 114 organisations, ranging from women abuse support groups, early childhood development centres, organisations for the disabled, feeding schemes and youth missions. Each beneficiary received R35 000.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Chairperson of the Community Services Committee, Councillor Zama Sokhabase, applauded the good work done by the various organisations which include non-profit organisations, non-governmental organisations and community based organisations.

She said these organisations gave the city “strength and support” as they were on the ground working with communities.

“You are on the ground daily working with our people in communities. We appreciate the important role you play. And together I do believe we can do more,”  Sokhabase said.

She said while cheques were given to worthy organisations this year, next year they would find out the need of each cause and provide assistance according to that need whether it be soccer kits or equipment. She said this was keeping in line with regulations by provincial and national government.

Manager of the Grant-in-aid Office Brandon Pillay said almost R4 million was given to beneficiaries for the 2017/18 financial year. He said his office received 426 applications last year, with 124 shortlisted. After a thorough verification process 114 organisations were selected.

“This year we are funding 114 beneficiaries. Last year we assisted 107, so that is an increase of seven beneficiaries. Last year we gave R28 000 to each beneficiary and this year it has increased to R35 000. This shows we are a caring Municipality and demonstrates that we care about our communities,” he said.

Maggie Naidoo of the Starwood Ladies Support Group, which has been in existence for 20 years, was happy to receive funding. She said they empower, motivate and skill women who have been victims of abuse and are referred to them by police, social workers and the courts. 

They are going to use the money to buy sewing machines to teach women to sew and become independent by earning an income.

“This is the first time we have applied for grant-in-aid and we are so happy to receive it. It will help,” said Naidoo.

Scelo Dlamini from the South African National Deaf Association KZN said it felt good for deaf people to have access to the Municipality as communication was often a barrier.

“Through this funding our community will be empowered by working with the Municipality. We are so happy to receive this support and we thank the Municipality for honouring the deaf community in this way,” he said.

Meanwhile, Cedric Mkhize from eThekwini Deaf Soccer League thanked the Municipality for selecting them.

“We really suffered in previous years without funding. Now we are supported. This grant will make a big difference. We will use it for computers and to roll-out the programme across the various districts,” said Mkhize.

The Mercury