Durban - A Phoenix family who installed an electric gate to protect their property were shocked to come home and find that the gate had been stolen.
In CCTV footage shared on social media, two men can be seen fiddling with the gate motor before lifting the gate off its rails and carrying it on to a van and driving off, with half of the gate jutting out of the van..


The family, who asked that they not be named, were on holiday when their security company, KZN VIP Protection Services, phoned to alert them after a neighbour had noticed the missing gate on Thursday. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It’s so traumatising to know that anyone could easily walk into our yard, into our home, it’s terrifying,” said the wife yesterday.  

Police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbhele, said a case of theft was being investigated. 

KZN VIP’s Glen Naidoo said this family was one of many who had had their gates stolen in Phoenix in the past year. 

“We suspect that people go around telling people they make gates, but instead steal them and sell them at a reduced price. They are very expensive,” he said. 

Designed by the husband with a laser-cut image of the Hindu deity Ganesha, the stainless steel gate had cost the family almost R25000. It was almost 5m wide and about 2m tall and took four men to carry when it was ­installed, said the wife. 

“It took just two of them to steal it in under four minutes. I don’t know how they didn’t get shocked by the electric fence at the top of the gate,” she said. 

The husband said they had a security system, including cameras pointing right at the gate. 

“They were even wearing masks,” he said of the thieves. We installed all this security and the gate especially so that our son could play in the yard safely. We made it motorised so we wouldn’t have to get out of the car to open it because there is a risk of being hijacked. Then they come for one of those very security measures,” he said. 

Following the incident, the family hired a guard but still felt so vulnerable without a gate they could hardly sleep. They have now installed a temporary manual gate. 
The Mercury