Durban - Are you ready to smell the fuel, hear the engines and witness the best aerobatic teams South Africa can offer? On June 2, the Newcastle Airport will be host pilots from all over the country. While the organisers hoped to celebrate the new airport building, this will not be ready in time. 

The Northern Natal community, and visitors from as far as Bloemfontein, Johannesburg and Margate, can look forward to one of the most relaxing and vibrant airshows this year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads



The Air Total Newcastle Airshow is the only airshow in KwaZulu-Natal. It is also rated the best value for money, as it is the most affordable airshow in South Africa

The entrance fee has remained the same for the past eight years, and this year is no exception.

Tickets will cost R50 an adult, R30 for high school learners and R10 for primary and pre-primary school children.

Organisers said the South African Air Force will be in full swing at the airshow. The elite Silver Falcons will wow the crowds during their shows. This is a historic day for the Silver Falcons with their brand new team, Team 82 and first team leader of colour. The Airforce will display its Oryx and Augusta Helicopters and its Casa. The Airforce will also be part of the CSI of the Airshow.

They also confirmed that approximately 100 pupils would have the opportunity to fly for the first time in their lives.



Also worth noting is the Golden Eagles Parachute Team of the South African Defence Force, which will wow the crowd with displays.

The main sponsor of the airshow, Air Total, is determined to assist the community of Northern Natal to give their dreams some wings. Air Total will be involved with the Educational Day for Grade 11 pupils. Denel, CAA and SAAF will also speak to the learners to show them different options in the aviation field.

Menno Parsons will be one of the single biggest sponsors of the Air Total Newcastle Airshow. Parsons will be sending four of his aircraft and machines to take part. He is passionate about aviation and a good friend of the Newcastle Airshow.

Capital Air’s Brian Emmines will again be the commentator on the day. 

www.airshownewcastle.co.za
The Mercury