Durban - Irregular expenditure by the eThekwini municipality is set to dramatically reduce this year to just over R100 million from the R513m recorded in the 2016/17 financial year.
This is according to Krish Kumar, the city’s chief financial officer, who was addressing the executive committee (Exco) during a deliberation on the regularisation of R48m in irregular expenditure.

The irregular expenditure was incurred due to deviations from the normal supply chain management policy prescripts.

City manager Sipho Nzuza said the decrease was because of the controls that have been put in place at the city.

“The controls that I actually introduced are manifesting through the reduction of such numbers in irregular expenditure and all other wasteful expenditure 

“At the same time you need to ensure that you do not lead to people being so scared to make decisions which they can explain. Sometimes these things come through unplanned activities,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mayor Zandile Gumede said the city was transparent in its dealings. She said her administration had worked hard to reduce “whatever bad tendencies” were there when she assumed office.

“eThekwini is not a small municipality, we are running a very big organisation and it is very complicated. I am very happy,” she said.

Some of the irregular expenditure was incurred as a result of the city still procuring services while relying on expired contracts. 

In another case, the World Aids Day event was attended by numbers exceeding those that were anticipated resulting in additional expenditure. 

The irregular expenditure incurred due to the pressures emanating from the event 
had to do with the procurement of goods and services without any written formal quotes or any bidding 
process.

Kumar said in this case there was no time to procure goods and services using normal channels.

But Kumar assured councillors that goods and services were delivered but said the 
deviations will be scrutinised by the Municipal Public 
Accounts Committee and 
further action including 
disciplinary action may arise from this.

“There is a process now to track these contracts well in advance to avoid us using expired contracts and to ensure that officials do get reminders. We are trying to manage that and we hope it will reduce irregular expenditure.”

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the over-expenditure incurred showed that there is “no proper planning and people were doing things in a rushed manner”.

The DA said if there is no consequence management for officials who either wilfully or negligently approve irregular expenditure, such will not stop.

Irregular expenditure in municipalities has been one of the main headaches for the 
Auditor General who, last month, revealed that it had increased by 75% to R28.376billion from the R16bn recorded the previous year.
The Mercury