Durban - Closed-circuit television cameras are going to be installed in and around pump stations and other government infrastructure within the Ugu District Municipality following tampering with infrastructure, allegedly by striking staff.
The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), on behalf of the provincial executive council, has had to intervene in the municipality because labour issues led to the public being left without water for a week. 

Engagements were ­expected to continue today after an urgent meeting on Friday with representatives from the ­police. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The department said the cameras would be to monitor the sites and prevent property damage. 

“We are taking the situation very seriously as it presents a threat to life with the disruption to basic services such as water. We cannot tolerate lawlessness,” said Cogta MEC ­Nomusa Dube-Ncube. 

Jaycee Ncanana, the provincial secretary of the SA Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu), said he was waiting for a report-back as the union was not aware what had sparked the industrial action. 

“What we know for now is that this is a wildcat strike that was not planned properly with  permission obtained or sanctioned by the union,” he said. 

He added that 11 Samwu shop stewards had been suspended. But a meeting where the union was to be officially informed of the reasons for the suspensions had not gone ahead as workers had ­embarked on a work stoppage. 

Cogta said the shop stewards had been suspended after they stormed a meeting to raise the matter of ­deductions being made from salaries following an illegal work stoppage in March. 

Cogta said the shop stewards were later given a chance to make written submissions arguing their cases against their suspensions, and why they should not be charged for gross misconduct and insubordination. 

The department said that as a result, aggrieved staff members had responded by disrupting service delivery to the public. 

Dube-Ncube urged all workers to go back to work immediately.

“We are a country that is governed by laws, and this tendency of some to draw the attention of the authorities is unacceptable. We must not be taken advantage of because we are a caring government,” she said.

“This illegal strike has resulted in innocent people being without water. This is wrong and we are not going to accept it, and if they do not stop we will be left with no option but to deal severely with this illicit behaviour,” said Dube-Ncube.

Aggrieved

Similar tactics were used last year when municipal infrastructure was vandalised, allegedly by aggrieved staff. 

At that time, the issue was about a group life insurance scheme that had been cancelled. Although this was an insurance, workers had cried foul over not getting anything back after years of contributing, and the municipality agreed to pay them almost R20million. 

To deal with the strike, a meeting has been called with all relevant stakeholders, including Dube-Ncube and Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda. 

Cogta spokesperson Lennox Mabaso yesterday said progress was being made and that contingency plans were being implemented. He said the priority was to restore services to the public and to work towards a lasting solution. 

Ugu said it had identified all the affected areas and deployed teams to do assessments. 

“It seems some of the areas that were restored at the weekend were tampered with, and we are working to bring those areas back online.”
The Mercury