Durban - Grade 12 pupils could soon be able to choose when they want to write their final exams, that is if the plans by the Department of Education to implement a “two exams” system moves ahead.
The system is commonly referred to as modularisation.

Modularisation is currently used to assist pupils who were progressed to Grade 12, where they are allowed to write their exams either in the October/ November period or in June the following year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Progressed pupils are those affectively pushed to Grade 12 despite not meeting the requirements.

The first group of progressed pupils benefiting from modularisation started writing their exams this month.

The department has also done away with supplementary exams: those pupils that fail or want to improve a mark for a subject must write in June.

In terms of the national Education Department’s recent proposal, non-progressed pupils would be able to decide whether they want to write in the October/November exam period or the following year in June. 

The proposal was presented at the education portfolio committee at the KwaZulu-Natal legislature last week by the provincial department’s acting curriculum manager Dr Barney Mthembu.

He said the plan, should it be implemented, would ease the challenges for pupils and the department. 

“It is something that the national Department of Basic Education has said is the future of exams in the country. 

“It is already implemented in other countries that allow for multiple exams.” 

Mthembu said he was not certain of all the technical aspects as the proposal was still at the discussion phase. 

“If, for instance, you (the pupil) on your first exams decide you are not ready, you are given another opportunity. The Department of Basic Education said in the end it will not be only the progressed learners who have multiple exams.

“If this happens, in my view, it will help to reduce the number of learners who repeat the grade. At the moment whether you are ready or not, you have to write the exams,” Mthembu said. 

DA education spokesperson MPL Rishigen Viranna said: “This was the first time we had heard that this was even being considered. We will have to look at what benefit it is to learners and what it will do with our budget. 

“The first group of learners that have been modularised have just started writing exams. 

“We will have to look at how they performed.”

IFP spokesperson on education Thembeni Madlopha-
Mthethwa said the party did not agree with the proposal. 

She said the problem was that under this system, some pupils would get left behind.

Professor Labby Ramrathan, head of School of Education Studies at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, said the system was problematic as it would focus only on the pass rate. 

“A positive that might come from it is pupils can complete Grade 12, but it just extends 
schooling years from 12 to 13.” 
The Mercury