Durban - Manor Gardens residents have rejected a proposal to demarcate part of their suburb for student accommodation, saying this will cause property values to plummet while attracting “noisy and unruly” students to the neighbourhood.
The student accommodation precinct is a project spearheaded by the eThekwini Municipality, to set up a planning and management tool to proactively direct student accommodation around the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Howard and Westville campuses. 

While residents had feared that there was a plan to build a student village, city spokesperson Mandla Nsele said the plan does not include building a new accommodation establishment for students, but rather demarcating 
an area, initially within a 500m radius of the Westville campus and 1km radius of Howard College in which students could be accommodated. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said the area of focus has since been enlarged to include the main routes down to the Medical School but leaves out areas not on or adjacent to these main routes.

“We are trying to contain student accommodation and decrease and reduce infiltration into the wider residential areas, which is currently happening. At present the municipality does not have a policy to guide where this happens,” said Nsele.

The study is being conducted by Zimanga Urban and Rural Design, led by Professor Michael Kahn, a town planner  assisted by Deepak Rampaul and a project team from the consultancy. 

In a joint statement in response to The Mercury’s questions, Kahn and Rampaul said the plan would assist the university to house 
students closer to their campuses while unlocking potential economic opportunities. 

Chairperson of the Community Police Sub-Forum which covers Manor Gardens, Janus Horn, said many residents were scared of change. 

“Some residents had a vision of houses being demolished and huge student complexes being built. Others see this as an opportunity.” 

One resident concerned about a spike in crime said: “Student digs are seen as soft targets and students are not all security-conscious.” 

According to the statement from Kahn and Rampaul, there are proposed incentives for those residents within the demarcated area who apply and are approved to accommodate students. These include rates holidays or reduced rates and tax breaks. 

But a Manor Gardens resident who had identified an opportunity and opened up her home to students could now lose out as her home fell outside the demarcated area. 

“Why must we, who are running student accommodation properly, be punished for being outside the precinct?”

The statement said those outside the area could still apply but, should they not be approved, their establishments would be considered illegal and closed down. 

Manor Gardens Primary School’s governing body expressed concern about the influx of students. They feared this would lead to a marked decrease in the number of potential pupils enrolling at the school. 

“As time passes, more and more home owners in the streets outside the demarcated area will want to convert their homes too, further reducing the possibility of families with young children moving into the local area. 

“Currently, many MGPS pupils don’t reside in the immediate area around the school. However, drawing more and more children from further afield to keep the school viable is a concern.”

They called for the municipality rather to enforce the current, existing by-laws to “control and contain illegal home extensions, overcrowded student houses and unsavoury student behaviour so that a student ‘village’ does not take hold and push out old and young families.”

Another resident said Manor Gardens already had regular water and power outages. 

“How would changing this area to a high-density area affect the already strained infrastructure?”

Community members do have an opportunity to have their say during the stakeholder engagement phase of the project, which is currently in progress. 

The next public meeting will be on Thursday at St Cyprian’s Church in Umbilo Road. 

After their appointment in May last year, Zimanga started the study and have completed the first three phases - inception report, situational analysis and precinct plans. 

There is a draft for phase four - translation of the precinct plan into a land use management system that will be finalised only once the stakeholder engagement phase is completed. 

The draft report was presented to municipal line departments Tuesday. 

They also met with university heads of department in August last year and then ward councillors, UKZN Students’ Representative Council members. 

A couple who have been living in the area for a long time are vehemently opposed to the proposed development.

“We stand strongly against this proposal. This is so unfair on this community where many of us have bought homes and settled here for the future.”