Durban - Umgungundlovu District Municipality has come under fire for setting aside R6million for this year’s Nelson Mandela Marathon.
The annual race will be held on August 26.

Tabling its budget recently, the municipality said it had set aside the funds for the marathon that starts in Edendale and ends at the Mandela Capture Site in Howick. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

However, opposition parties argued that the sponsorship of sports events was not the core function of the municipality, and that since the event bears the name of an icon, the ­organisers should be able to find sponsorship.

An amount of R17m is ­expected to be spent on the event, with some funds ­expected to be sourced from the provincial government.

One of the country’s banks has pledged about R2m. 

Municipal spokesperson Brian Zuma said efforts were being made to attract more sponsors.

DA councillor Bongumusa Nhlabathi said: “In principle we support the Mandela Marathon, but we do not support the funding model. This marathon carries the name of an icon and should be self-sustaining by sourcing sponsorships.”

Nhlabathi said that when the marathon first started, they were told that as it grew in stature, it would rely less on the council for funding. “The opposite is happening; last year we spent about R4m and this year we’ll spend about R6m. We cannot afford to spend millions when there are residents who are still without water.”

Nhlabathi said they were also concerned that the report detailing the finances of last year’s marathon had also not been presented to council.

“We suspect something fishy is happening there.” 

IFP councillor Bukelani Zuma said: “We are concerned that the amount spent is taking away from service delivery. We have nothing against sport, but this is not our core function.” 

Zuma said the marathon was an important event on the province’s sporting calendar, and would have a significant impact on local economic ­development and tourism.

“The Mandela Marathon is a flagship event on the country’s calendar of events, and is in the calendar of Athletics South Africa as well, attracting runners from more than 30 countries.

“But, more importantly, the Mandela Marathon is a developmental race, it affords thousands of runners an opportunity to be competitive and improve their running skills.” 

He said the Mandela Marathon Association would be established soon, and that last year’s report was being prepared and would be tabled ­before council soon.
The Mercury