Durban - Twenty minutes is how long it allegedly took to finalise a disciplinary hearing and dismiss former Msunduzi municipal manager for Infrastructure and Services, Sabatha Nomnganga.
A report announcing Nomn­ganga’s dismissal was tabled before council on Wednesday. 

The report, which had been brought in for noting by council, plunged the ANC caucus into open conflict as some were angered by how it had been managed, and they walked out of the meeting. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nomnganga had been on suspension for the past 11 months. He was suspended on allegations that he authorised about R750 000 payment to one company, and spent about R5million on a smart meter project, but failed to ensure the work was completed.

The Mercury has seen a copy of the invoice relating to the first allegation, and it showed that he had not approved the payment. And a copy of the second allegation showed that about four people, including municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe, had signed off on the report, indicating that  the work had been done.

Nomnganga described the case against him as a farce.  

“I have not even been told that I was dismissed. 

“The hearing on allegations against me was on June7. On that day we were challenging the hearing at the labour court, but the municipality proceeded with it in my absence. My lawyer was there.

“It started at around 11am, and at about 11.20am the hearing was completed. We did not even get to be heard. Twenty minutes and a three-page report is all it took to dismiss a senior manager,” he said. 

The report and its recommendations were finalised on the same day. 

Nomnganga said he believes he was suspended and eventually fired because he ­refused to be “part and parcel of looting” that was taking place, and for refusing to take “illegal instructions”.

“I prepared myself for this outcome from the beginning. I am not surprised or shocked at what transpired,” he said. 

Other sources in the council have attributed Nomnganga’s dismissal to a recording that emerged recently in which Hadebe allegedly coaxed officials, including Nomnganga, to give a job to a person who did not meet the minimum ­requirements for it.

A source close to Nomnganga said he was likely to contest the dismissal, adding that “the council will lose this one”. 

An ANC councillor present at the meeting said some of the ANC councillors who walked out were angry about the lack of detail leading to Nomnganga’s dismissal. 

“The report was just three pages, there were no supporting documents with all the important information that could help council form an opinion about the allegations and the findings,” said the source. 

“At this rate, the ANC is eroding its support, and soon we will have to govern via coalitions,” he said.

ANC chief whip Trueman Magubane would only confirm that a report about Nomn­ganga had been tabled. The Msunduzi Municipality did not respond to requests for comment. 
The Mercury