Durban - A heavy police presence will remain in Amandawe, on the KwaZulu-Natal south coast after violent protests rocked the area on Tuesday morning. Police have arrested 43 people for public violence. They are due in court on Wednesday. Police had to use a Nyala to disperse the angry crowd. 

At around 5am, residents barricaded Dududu Road with burning tyres and rocks. 

Provincial police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbhele, said some of the protesters hurled stones at passing vehicles and at police.  

“Scottburgh police, Public Order Police, Road Traffic Inspectorate and other security agencies joined forces to restore law and order and stabilise the situation however, the protestors were determined to march to the municipal offices in Scottburgh,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

According to Mbhele, the crowd was volatile and there was a standoff with police. 



“Public Order Police responded with the necessary force and the means at their disposal to disperse the volatile and increasingly violent crowd. Many of the protestors regrouped at various points. Protesters uprooted trees and broke branches from the bush alongside the freeway and brought traffic to a standstill by placing these across the freeway,” she said. 

Mbhele said the crowd continued to stone vehicles and cases of malicious injury to property and public violence were registered by the Scottburgh SAPS to investigate.

She said a memorandum of demands had been presented to the authorities of the municipality regarding service delivery on May 30.

“It is believed that the community was dissatisfied with the response received and decided to express their dissatisfaction by taking to the streets,” she said. 

Mbhele said a nearby sugarcane plantation was also set alight. 

“Police used a Nyala to clear the road and allow for the free flow of traffic once again. The situation is being monitored by police and preventative measures are being employed to thwart any further flare-ups,” she said. 

The Mercury