Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health has slammed the Democratic Alliance for claims made in a press statement regarding five hospitals having to undergo administration. 

Earlier on Monday, the DA released a statement claiming that five KZN hospitals had been placed under administration. The DA's Dr Imran Keeka claimed that they were informed, by a well-placed source, that RK Khan, Northdale, Ngwelezane, Murchison and Ladysmith hospitals were placed under administration by the national health department.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

"While the DA has been able to confirm that a task team, led by a Dr A Pillay and Dr Makhanya, will be arriving in the province shortly we do not have any information around the starting date or the duration of the administration period. We will therefore submit parliamentary questions to MEC Dhlomo as a matter of urgency to establish these time frames and expect the MEC to respond to this at the next meeting of the KZN health portfolio committee as well," Keeka said. 

Responding to the claims, the department said 30 support teams per province had been established by the national department of health, as part of an initiative to identify and address challenges with healthcare service across the country, including in KZN.

In a statement issued to the media, the department said these teams will be spending a few days at each health facility.

They added that this exercise was formally communicated to all provinces, with a request to identify five facilities per province to form part of this exercise.

"The KZN Department of Health chose RK Khan, Ngwelezane, Murchison, Northdale, and Ladysmith hospitals were chosen. Support teams that are made up of officials from the national department of health will be visiting and inspecting these identified hospitals. This initiative is a response by a caring and responsive government in its quest to improve the provision of healthcare services, with a particular focus on addressing challenges such as waiting times, staff shortages, availability of hospital beds, overcrowding, and the clearance of patient backlogs, particularly at the casualty areas," the statement read. 

According to the statement, the department said these support teams will work closely with their counterparts at provincial, district and facility levels and will present reports to the provincial heads of department.

"The department remains committed to providing quality healthcare to the people of KwaZulu-Natal despite the high burden of diseases, and rejects with contempt any deliberate disinformation campaigns by unscrupulous individuals," the statement said. 

The Mercury