EDITOR'S VIEW - All over the world companies, big and small, are vulnerable to the activities of hackers who illegally access their IT infrastructure for nefarious purposes.
While this form of cybercrime has been common in Europe and North America, there is tangible evidence to suggest that South African companies need to wake up to this reality.

Clients and investors of Liberty Holdings were in panic mode early this week when they woke to news that hackers had infiltrated the company’s computer system, and were demanding compensation.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Many Liberty customers took to social media wondering if their investments and policies with the company had been affected. Obviously this is a reasonable expectation from worried customers who have invested their hard-earned money with the company.

This debacle should be a wake-up call for many of the local companies that they, too, can become victims of cybercriminals. The time has come for local blue-chip companies to invest in software that will protect clients’ investments from being compromised.

Catching cybercriminal masterminds is not easy, and in many cases impossible because they operate from all corners of the world.

It is not only companies such as Liberty that need to up their act, but local law enforcement agencies need to learn how to investigate these types of misdemeanours. It is not a shame to ask for help. The Hawks can learn from their international counterparts such as the FBI on how to track down cybercriminals. 

Any crime that threatens local companies is a threat to the country’s financial well-being.

Liberty should be congratulated for its open communication strategy adopted in the wake of the computer breach. Apart from messages sent to its customers, the company has, through its chief executive David Munro, been updating clients using various media platforms.

Other businesses, government departments and parastatals need to beef up their IT systems before it’s too late.

No one is safe from computer hackers.