Durban - The Association for the Aged (Tafta) is promising patrons an evening of glamour and grandeur at their first ever Fundraising Gala Dinner  in commemoration of the association’s 60th birthday taking place later this year. 

To be hosted by well-known celebrity, radio presenter and comedian Darren Maule, at the prestigious Southern Sun Elangeni Hotel, an evening of opulence, fine dining, and outstanding entertainment is on the menu for those attending the commemorative event, which will hopefully become an annual event on Durban’s social calendar, according to Tafta CEO Femada Shamam.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Through the Night of Diamond theme, Tafta seeks this year to invest in the association’s commitment to providing nutritious, balanced meals to Durban’s elderly, both under Tafta’s roof and to the greater Durban community through its long-standing Meals on Wheels programme. Our meal programme extends to elders in Tafta homes and in the community - who are housebound or who no longer can cook for themselves. We prepare convenient ready-to-eat meals, which are delivered to the homes of the elderly or housebound. The meals prepared provide essential nourishment that elders require," she said. 

“Escalating food prices continue to impact on the elderly. Tafta’s meal programme aims to relieve the stress of high food costs on elders.  We are constantly looking to communities and corporates to help extend our reach to elders who are constantly in need of our care by supporting our fundraising initiatives such as this year’s gala dinner event,” explained Tafta’s Income Development, Marketing and Public Relations Manager, Gail Samuels.

Event tickets cost R550 per person or R5500 per table; includes a three-course dinner, an exclusive gift bag and an evening filled with entertainment.

To book your table or enquire about using this unique opportunity to network your business through prize sponsorships, please contact Ateesha Rampersad on ateesha@tafta.org.za or phone 031 332 3721.
The Mercury