Cape Town - The City of Cape Town has confirmed that a WhatsApp message making the rounds, which has warned Capetonians about "hurricane type storm", is fake. City of Cape Town Traffic Service's Richard Bosman has said that the message is "not legit and not from us". Mayco member for Safety and Security, JP Smith has also revealed that because of the fake message the City is being overwhelmed with calls."As a result of the hoax message doing the rounds, the City’s Disaster Operations Centre is now inundated with calls from the public about the message, and this is blocking the lines for real emergencies. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads"We ask that the media please help us highlight the fact that this is indeed a hoax message and advising the public not to call the DOC number in that message unless they have a real emergency."FAKE: The City of Cape Town has confirmed that a WhatsApp message warning Capetonians about "hurricane type storm" is fake.The City had previously sent out its own report, advising the public about the cold and wet weather. In the City's official report, "Wet and cold weather expected over the Western Cape Province, 14 to 15 June 2018" they have detailed a variety of what people can be expected due to the cold front, and the necessary precautions that should be taken."Large accumulations of water will result in flooding of roads as well as formal and informal settlements. This may result in damage to property and lead to a disruption in services to communities. Due to the vastness of the areas and District Municipalities covered, this may put short-term strain on emergency personnel," the report reads.READ MORE: Extreme weather warning for Cape"Heavy downpours during Thursday could result in flash flooding, possibly affecting transport routes and low-lying infrastructure. Mudslides and rockfalls are also possible. As it is exam time, students in rural communities should be advised when making their way to and from school."The report also includes these precautionary measures from the South African Weather Service: Strong, gusty interior winds over the interior increase the risk of runaway fires, therefore the public are advised not to start any fires or leave fires unattended under these conditions.When encountering flooding: If possible stay indoors and off the roads, avoid crossing rivers and swollen streams where water is above your ankles. If trapped in a flooding situation whilst in a vehicle, rather abandon it and climb to higher ground. In buildings, move valuables to a safe place above the expected flood level. Switch off electricity at the supply point to the building.In rural areas protect/relocate animals to a safe place on higher ground. Abandon your home immediately if evacuation is recommended by duly authorized officials, before access is cut off by flood water.NEVER drive on a road covered or obscured by water. You do not know how deep it is or if the road has been washed away. If the vehicle stalls, leave it immediately and seek higher ground. Be especially cautious at night when it is difficult to identify flood hazards. Listen to the radio or TV for warnings and obey the instructions from Disaster Management officials.The South African Weather Service said that it will continue to monitor any further developments relating to this weather system and will issue subsequent updates as required.Updated information can also be found at www.weathersa.co.za as well as via the SA Weather Service Twitter account @SAWeatherServic@TheCapeArgusCape Argus