Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal departments of Transport and Community Safety and Liaison have condemned the recent protests that led to the blockade this week of some of the province’s main highways, the N2 and the N3, and the torching of trucks.
The department promised zero tolerance against acts of lawlessness, saying they had a negative bearing on the country’s economy.

This was after three trucks were torched on the N2 near Mtubatuba earlier this week, while a protest by truck drivers led to a blockade on the N3 near Van Reenen’s Pass.

The truck drivers, who also held a protest in April in which several trucks were burnt, are apparently upset over foreigners allegedly being given preference for jobs.

Kwanele Ncalane, the spokesperson of the Transport and Community Safety and ­Liaison departments, said: “No one is going to hold this government to ransom by employing tactics that are unlawful. (The implications) are huge because it means that the economy of the country almost comes to a standstill. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Most companies and factories are also using the ports of Durban and Richards Bay to receive their imports. Beyond that, the protests also cause congestion on the roads, slowing down economic activity,” he said.

He added that the arrest of 62 truck drivers on Wednesday showed that the government was serious about dealing ­decisively with unlawful protests on the roads.

Ncalane said the government had engaged with stakeholders in the freight transportation industry, including drivers.

He said some of the issues raised by the disgruntled drivers pointed to a lack of enforcement of some of the country’s labour laws.

“The premier directed that there should be a memorandum of understanding where all parties commit to working together on these issues.”

KZN Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda had also listened to some of the drivers’ concerns. 

He said that, while not condoning the protests, the government would be rolling out a plan to deal proactively with protests, and this would include socio-economic interventions.

The Road Freight Association warned that small trucking companies and operators were the ones that were most affected by the strikes. 

“It hurts the small guys a lot because these are not people who have 10 or so trucks parked in a yard at any given time. They do not have the capital or the financial depth to deal with this sort of thing,” said Gavin Kelly, the association’s spokesperson.

He said it would be nearly impossible to police such protests. 

“You cannot escort every truck. And it is impossible to identify the hot spots because they change,” Kelly said.

Statistics

Asked about the allegation that trucking companies tended to employ more foreign drivers than South Africans, Kelly said there were no statistics or data to support such claims.

“Every single driver or employee who works for an operator has to be registered with a bargaining council. It is the council that can provide such stats. It is interesting that they have not taken a far stronger verbal stance,” he said.

Kelly added that figures from members of the association showed that fewer than 10% of their drivers were foreigners, and those were mostly drivers who are used in cross-border operations to transport goods.

Economist Professor Bonke Dumisa characterised the protests as acts of economic sabotage, saying they were happening across the country.

He warned that it was hurting the economy as the government would have to spend more money to repair infrastructure damaged during some of the protests.

“The ratings agencies have warned that if we play around with the budget deficit we will sink into even worse credit ratings,” Dumisa said.
The Mercury