Durban - The statutory religious rights commission plans to approach the Equality Court following the alleged continued discrimination of school pupils who belong to the Shembe faith.
The learners grow their hair long in accordance with their faith, but KwaZulu-Natal school teachers have been cutting the pupils’ hair.

Thoko Mkhwanazi-Xaluva, the chairperson of the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities, said they would also open criminal cases against a police officer who was allegedly called in to a ­Maphumulo school to cut ­learners’ hair.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Speaking at a press conference in Durban on Thursday, Mkhwanazi-Xaluva said this was a huge challenge in the province. 

“These children have a right to their religion and a right to an education - they can’t be made to choose. If the Nazareth Baptist Church does not believe in shaving the hair and a teacher cuts the children’s hair at school by force, that is assault. The religious rights of these children is being violated,” she said. 

The matter was reported to the commission by the Nazareth Judicial Council in 2016. 

Secretary Thabo Sambothi said that when they approached the affected schools - which he said were all around the province - they were told to write letters for the pupils to produce as proof that they were members of the Shembe church. But, when the council provided these, they were sent back, and the forced cutting continued. 

Mkhwanazi-Xaluva said no school policy should undermine the constitution, which guaranteed the right to religion and religious freedom. 

The commission initially reached out to the KZN Department of Education, asking it to intervene as its ­employees were “deliberately oppressing children because of their beliefs”.

Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi yesterday said a circular had been sent out instructing all schools not to discriminate on the basis of ­religious association, and for the practice of cutting pupils’ hair to stop. 

“We will follow up and investigate any school that is not following the order by the department.”

While at least one learner was present with their parent at the briefing, they decided against speaking to the media. Sambothi said that, like many other parents, they were afraid to come forward because of victimisation.
The Mercury