Durban - The IFP has called on the Office of the Public Protector to investigate how Mhlathuze Water spent more than R100million meant for drought relief and delivery of water in the Zululand area.
The IFP mayor in the Zululand District Municipality, Thulasizwe Buthelezi, feared the resources had been “diverted”.  

Zululand District Municipality is responsible for water delivery to communities in the northern parts of the province. 

Mhlathuze Water is a public entity owned by the Department of Water and Sanitation. 

Its corporate communications manager, Siyabonga Maphumulo, rubbished the 
allegation, saying  “these allegations would be laughable were they not so tragic”. ­

Buthelezi said: “The bulk of the money has been spent and yet there is nothing on 
the ground. All you see are ‘white elephants’ and many residents are still without water.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said that in the 2015/16 financial year, Mhlathuze Water was appointed by the department to complete supply projects in Abaqulusi and Nongoma local municipalities as part of efforts to address water challenges. 

“An amount of R185m was allocated by the Department 
to Mhlathuze Water according to the budget allocation,” 
Buthelezi said.

He said that as of January, Mhlathuze Water had already utilised R115m of the total 
allocation and asked the National Treasury for a roll-over of R70m.

“As the water service authority for the Zululand District, the municipality has no evidence to show that R185m worth of water infrastructure has been rolled out by Mhlathuze Water. Instead, the communities in certain wards still have no access to water,” claimed Buthelezi. 

In a letter to Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, Buthelezi wrote: “The municipality is of the view that resources from the national fiscus meant for poor communities have been diverted elsewhere. ”

Maphumulo disputed the allegations of wrongdoing, saying for the first time more than 6000 homes now have access to clean running water in Nongoma and Abaqulusi. 

“While it is possible for some to feign blindness to the positive impacts that the water infrastructure project has brought to the Zululand District, the beneficiaries of this project are far wiser and have welcomed with glee the results of a project that has rescued them from the indignity of drawing water from rivers frequented by livestock,” he said. 

Maphumulo said the chief executive of Mhlathuze Water, Mthokozisi Duze, had invited Buthelezi on a sight inspection of some of the projects being implemented.

But he claimed that Buthelezi hd spurned the invitation. 

“The mayor would know that it would be deemed as irregular expenditure for the Department of Water and Sanitation to allocate R185m to Mhlathuze Water and then not receive any updates on work completed,” he said.

The office of the Public Protector did not respond to requests for comment. 
The Mercury