Durban - Isipingo residents want severe punishment imposed on companies responsible for dumping waste into the Isipingo River.
They allege some companies are using canals that are meant to control flood waters to dump waste, which then flows into the Isipingo River and pours out on to Isipingo Beach. 

Although the problem has been ongoing for the past few years, they say it has been getting worse, and they allege that there appears to be no effort on the side of the authorities to deal with the matter. Even minor things like spraying the river to prevent the spread of mosquitoes has stopped, they alleged. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The water in the Isipingo River has turned green with what looks like a “bright foam” on top. 

One resident, Lesha Veeran, raised the alarm this past weekend after the family’s dog Blaze jumped over the boundary fence and went into the river. The dog was found covered in “oily” chemicals.

“My husband had to use hot water and household detergents just to clean the dog, but he still had that smell on him. He is light brown in colour, and when we pulled him out, he was shiny. If that had just been mud, he should not have been that shiny,” she said. 

In her Facebook post she bemoaned the dumping, saying: “When will you (councillor) help us stop factories from dumping their waste into the canals?”

She said fines imposed in the past did not help as they were too small, and companies always reverted to illegal ­behaviour after paying.

“We are concerned about  what the pollution might mean for our health. It is impossible to tell which company is responsible until tests are done,” she said.

Another resident, Essop Moosa, said some people were contemplating leaving the area. “One person recently bought a house, but he has put that house up for sale and is leaving because of the pollution. When the water is brown, that means the water is in good condition. The smell is unbearable; it can smell for three or four days. There used to be fish in this river, now there is nothing,” he said. 

Bongani Mthembu, of the South Durban Community Environmental Alliance, said that although they had not ­tested the water recently, generally oil was the most common pollutant found. 

“Companies use the canals close to them to flush away waste. It is cheap and there is a minimal chance they will get caught. On the rare occasion they are, the punishment is not a deterrent, because it’s minuscule,” he said. 

He added that authorities should be proactive and test the water regularly. 

“The only way to identify the companies responsible is if the water is tested at least eight hours after the waste is dumped.” Ward councillor Sunil Brij­mohan told The Mercury he was aware of the pollution problems, and asked to be called later for a detailed response. 

But he could not be reached for comment yesterday. The eThekwini Municipality was unable to respond to questions sent to them on Monday.