Durban - While the DA would like to see less of mayor Zandile Gumede’s face donning strategic points in the city and on promotional material such as banners and billboards, this is unlikely to change any time soon.
In fact, mayor Zandile Gumede told the DA to get used to the idea of her face being everywhere, saying that it would soon be at King Shaka International  Airport.

“I know you become very irritated by seeing a woman mayor, especially who is from the ANC. You will live with me. I am putting more and more (pictures). At the airport once you jump off you will see my face laughing at you. Today I am doing a photo shoot, I am going to be all over,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Gumede made the remarks during the city’s executive committee meeting on Tuesday in response to DA councillor Heinz de Boer’s concerns about a toolkit to be produced by the city for use by councillors. 

According to a report tabled at Exco, the toolkit, which is meant to professionalise meetings, will include items such as a branded tablecloth, promotional materials and a banner with the city’s logo and the respective councillor’s details.

“We like the idea of a toolkit for councillors. We like the idea of tools that will enable ward communities and councillors to go out to communities, to have some branding. 

“But madam mayor, please, we see you on posters, we see you on banners Must your photo be on all of our promotional stuff? At least give us a toolkit without your photo on it. Anything you give us, it has a photo of you, but we see you so often,” De Boer said. ANC councillors Barbara Fortein and Speaker William Mapena came to Gumede’s defence. 

“Who else is the mayor in this city? It surprises me that you are concerned about the mayor being all over the city. She is the first citizen of the city, and so she has to stand out. We are still going to be putting her (picture) at the airport and at the entrances of the city. So she is going to be in your face. She is the mayor of the city,” Fortein said.

De Boer further reminded the mayor that councillors had received a gift of a framed picture of the mayor in December, 2016.

Mapena said the gift had come from his office, and not from the mayor as the DA  suggested.  

He said the mayor’s picture, alongside that of other leaders in other spheres of government, should be in the councillors’ offices.

Gumede quipped that the DA  had raised the issue because it did not want to be led by a woman. 

“That is why you are fighting Patricia de Lille. Leave women mayors, they are here to stay. They must lead you,” she said.
The Mercury