Durban - Metrorail has put its foot down on the use of its railway lines as a “whoonga den” and has started removing addicts from this public infrastructure.
Danny Hattingh, the provincial business development manager at Metrorail, said their protection services teams had been chasing addicts and vagrants away from the lines since last Thursday. 

“We have had to take a stance and have them removed they now find themselves in the streets of the city, and the wrongdoings that they get up to continue.”

Hattingh  was speaking at the Durban leg of the Competition Commission’s market inquiry into land-based public transport. 

Hattingh said there was ­extensive theft of copper ­cables and metal in the area, which caused a breakdown in infrastructure, but Metrorail staff could not access the area to maintain the structures and facilities because of the drug users. Hattingh was referring to the railway lines mainly between Dalbridge Station in Congella and Berea Station in the Warwick precinct. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“There are no (sanitation) facilities there for these guys, so it becomes very unhygienic to try to operate in the area. This is right through the centre of our system. 

“If a train fails in that area and it stands there, unfortunately commuters and our train crew get robbed and attacked,” he said. 

In fact, earlier this year, a guard and driver were attacked and so badly injured that they have still not been able to return to work. 

“It had got so bad that we needed to do something to protect our own staff, commuters and assets,” said Hattingh. 

Chasing people off the railway lines was not sustainable, he said. 

“It’s very costly, but we will continue to do it until we ­believe we have everyone out of that system.”

He added that Metrorail was also pursuing ways to get a multidisciplinary approach to address the problem. 

“We need to get human settlements, the SAPS, all social services entities to first establish what it is that keeps these people there, what do we need to do to rehabilitate some of them, try to treat this problem rather than try to deal with it in a militant way. 

“If  there are criminals there, let’s follow the correct routes and try to rid this area of these people,” said Hattingh.
The Mercury