Durban - Engen has been granted an interim interdict barring five Wentworth residents from participating in illegal protests outside its refinery.
But Frank Alexander, Melanie Haines, Allen Holmes, Terrence Ogle and Brandon Manique have vowed to fight the petroleum giant, who they accuse of failing to engage meaningfully with the South Durban Basin community.

They were all in the Durban High Court on Monday when the matter was heard, but were not represented as they had not had sufficient time to ­engage an attorney since being served with the court papers last Thursday, Alexander said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The order, granted by Acting Judge Burt Liang, prohibits them from threatening or ­intimidating Engen, it’s subcontractors, staff, suppliers and customers, as well as entering, interfering or otherwise disrupting refinery business, including preventing trucks from accessing the premises. It also bars them from inciting others to committing such actions.

According to court papers, the application comes after five days of protests earlier this month in which the group and other members of the community participated, where an Engen truck was stoned and drivers were threatened, the refinery access gate was blocked and intimidating placards and signs “with names of specific staff members” were brandished.

The five residents were singled out as they had identified themselves as community leaders. 

On June 4, the community handed a memorandum to Engen demanding an undertaking that the company would hire people from the local community, a relaxation of the prohibition against the employment of people with a prior criminal history and for the construction of a clinic and skills training facility. 

Appearing for Engen, Paul Wallis told the court that the protest on June1 had become so violent that police had to disburse the protesters with stun grenades. 

Engen said in court papers that if the interdict was not granted, they could face irreparable harm. 

They stated that there was  a financial risk associated with potential damage to buildings and vehicles, as well as the economic loss associated with a drop in production or the inability to distribute the product. 

“These financial losses are effectively unrecoverable from a loose collection of people unlikely to be of significant ­financial means,” Engen said.

The five residents said they would engage legal representation and return to court on July 26. 
The Mercury