Durban - A bold project to move South African rhinos across the Indian Ocean to Australia for their safety is in full swing with the completion of their housing facility.
Allan Davies, the chairperson of the Australian Rhino Project, said the facility would be used to house the rhinos while they were in quarantine. He said it was built on a 500ha piece of open plain land in South Australia. 

The site was planted with vegetation suitable for the rhinos. According to the project, a “significant effort has been 
put into creating an environment that emulates the wild in Africa”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The initiative was started by South Africa-born Ray Dearlove. Having moved to Australia more than three decades ago, Dearlove founded the project out of concern for the animals’ survival. Last year 1028 rhinos were poached for their horns in South Africa. 

The project’s aim is to “establish a breeding herd of rhinos in Australia as an insurance population for the species”. 

Called Wild Africa, it will be the home of 80 rhinos that will be taken to Australia over four years. 

Davies said the latest milestone included key services being installed at the facility. 

These included two giant rainwater storage tanks. 

“The next priorities are to finalise the internal and external layouts and begin construction of the internal pens and external yards. Work on external fencing, vegetation and waterhole construction are all well progressed,” he said. 

This was according to the Australian government’s requirements that rhinos must be housed in an accredited facility with the appropriate veterinary expertise and rhino-handling experience.

The project depends on donations, and at a dinner held recently, more than R2million was raised for the facility. Owing to the country’s strict border controls, the rhinos will be held for no less than a year in New Zealand before reaching Wild Africa because of quarantine requirements. 

“Our plan is that, once conditions permit, the rhinos and/or their progeny will be reintroduced back to their natural habitat in South Africa. 

“We believe passionately that rhinos must be available to the world in the wild, not only in captivity,” said Davies. 
The Mercury