Durban - A “country in blue” where police are seen and felt everywhere by everyone.
That is what the SAPS promised South Africans on Monday, as they announced a nationwide clampdown on violent crime including hijackings, cash-in-transit heists, murders and robberies.

Police Minister Bheki Cele and National Police Commissioner Lieutenant-General Khehla Sitole made the pledge, while unveiling a multi-faceted crime-prevention plan, which is focused on Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The ambitious plan includes: 

Increasing police visibility by putting more police on the streets. 

Establishing a team to look into cold cases that are regarded as priority cases. 

Establishing a team to go after known wanted criminals.

Ensuring quicker response times by equipping police officers. 

Disarming criminals through targeted operations.

Using technology to fight crime. 

Overhauling crime intelligence. 

Going after criminal police officers.
WATCH: As #CITHeists spike, #BhekiCele unveils new crime-fighting strategies

In a frank admission that crime was out of control, Cele said the interventions were meant to stabilise the crime situation in the country.

To achieve high visibility, the police will be moving trained officers from administrative duties and putting them on the streets.

Sitole would not disclose the exact number of officers who will be moved to patrol the streets, saying he did not want to reveal the operational details for fear of tipping off the criminals.

“All members will be taken out of the offices. Of course, we will be allowing the administration to run but all those members who are trained will be in the field,” Sitole said, adding that the move would be permanent for many of them.

The police are also upping their game in terms of resources to ensure quicker response times. A total of 102 cars, including high-powered vehicles, have been purchased while aircraft will also be used to respond to some complaints.

“We have allocated and dedicated an aircraft for the Hawks, forensics teams and detectives to respond to crime scenes with immediate effect. There are certain crime scenes where they will be flown in,” Sitole said.
WATCH: #SadiaSukhraj suspects are 'hardcore' hijackers - Bheki Cele

He added that no criminals, including the rogue elements within the police, will be spared the wrath of the law.

“We are not going to say police are not involved (in crime), but what we are promising is that when we find that anyone of them is involved, that policeman is no longer part of usWe will take back our uniform and we’ll give them the orange (prison) overall.”

Sitole said crime intelligence had been asked to look into those police officers suspected of criminal behaviour. Lifestyle audits will also be done on those officers suspected of wrongdoing, he said.

Equally, the police vowed to protect its own who are on the right side of the law, with Sitole warning that anyone who touches any of his 192000 members will be in trouble.

“You touch one of us and all of us will come after you. Our response is 72 hours, if you touch us. In the process of protecting communities we cannot be touched,” Sitole told the media.

Cele said the police will also be clamping down on the proliferation of illegal firearms, saying the bulk of these come from communities because legal firearms are usually stolen during violent crimes, such as hijackings and robberies.

The “concept of door-to-door” searches will be a prominent feature of the strategy to root out illegal firearms.

“We will make life very tough for those who keep illegal firearms,” Cele vowed.

He said roadblocks and searches for wanted suspects will also become the order of the day.

Johan Burger, a researcher at the Institute for Security Studies, said increased police visibility would give assurance to the public that something was being done about crime, while serving as a deterrent. 

“All in all, I am happy with this announcement. We have never had a proper briefing in the way that we had today,” he said.

Burger said it would be difficult to put timelines on how long it will take the plan to work. “The police will have to give public feedback on a regular basis. 

“Over the next few months one would expect to start seeing an increase in the number of arrests and a decrease in the number of crimes, like cash-in-transit heists.”

Violence monitor Mary de Haas said the plan’s success will depend on its implementation and if the right people are put in the right positions.

“It all depends on the implementation So much will depend on whether this is implemented by competent people. 

“There are good people - it is a matter of deploying the good guys properly,” she said.

De Haas applauded the decision to move officers from administrative duties into active policing, saying that the police service organogram tended to be top heavy and there are many people who sit in offices “paper pushing”.

“What the police need is a human resources audit. Also the structure needs to be changed, as it is top heavy. In this province for example, we have six deputy provincial police commissioners, something we did not have in the 1990s,” she pointed out.
The Mercury