Durban - The Association for the Aged (Tafta) hosted its annual event to give thanks to the organisation’s volunteers, who have contributed to Tafta’s various programmes assisting its elders in the past year.

The special event, which was hosted at the Anna Conradie Wellness Centre at Tafta Lodge on South Beach was themed “Going back to the Sixties” in honour of Tafta’s 60th anniversary celebrations this year.

Tafta CEO Femada Shamam said the special lunch event for 250 of the association’s most dedicated volunteers, is one of its most important events on the calendar, as it recognises the spirit of humanity, kindness and respect shown to Tafta elders by this special group of people: “We’ve been hosting the volunteer thanksgiving event for many years now. As the world becomes a busier place, we realise the effort it takes for many of these amazing people to come forward and donate their time and service in aid of our elders”.

This year, Shamam said the event would also be used as the platform to launch its call to action to the Durban community to be part of Tata’s Mandela Month observations.

“This year specifically, we’re embracing the theme #BetheLegacy by calling on volunteers to please come through and share their specialist skills to allow our elders to live more enriched lives. We know the young and upwardly mobile don’t necessarily have a lot of time to give, but we’re willing to work around their availability to gain the skills the organisation is looking for. As an example, if a young project manager has just two hours a week to give us that would be fantastic way to help us get a few projects we’re looking to launch off the ground with their expert skills,” explained Shamam.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“At the current moment, we have Brazillian Julia Franco, who runs the Tafta knitting club, a yoga instructor has been running classes at some of our homes and a few other fitness classes, as well as a student teaching our elders computer skills at the Telkom sponsored media centres. We’re looking now for other skillsets that will help our elders live the Tafta philosophy of active ageing. We believe these services make excellent 67 Mandela minute contributions, and present an opportunity to continue giving even after Mandela Month in our homes” explained Shamam.

UKZN Mechanical engineering student Aaron Kisten of Isipingo, who is on a gap year from his studies, is currently volunteering in our media centres to help our elders with computer literacy: “When the idea was brought up, I actually was a bit apprehensive as I thought it was going to be quite a task, but once I got going, it’s been anything but that. It’s really an absolute joy to work with the elders; they’re smart, and they catch on extremely fast, I’d recommend volunteering to anyone,” said Kisten.

Four ways to get involved with Tafta this Mandela Day:

Visit - Help with painting, cleaning, gardening, crafts, cooking/serving meals, games and writing letters. Spend time with our elders by teaching them a fun activity, cook a meal together, or simply enjoy a chat.

Ask us for help - They may be old, but they still have a lot to give! If you're involved in an outreach project that needs items knitted or a 'granny' to read to young children, please let us know. Many fit and active elderly residents would enjoy the opportunity to volunteer and #BeTheLegacy themselves!

Have a clearout - Use your 67 minutes to clear out your home or garage and donate any clothing or household item that you haven't used in over a year to Tafta.If we can't use the items in our homes, we'll sell them through our charity shop – Granny's Attic – to raise much needed funds towards the care of needy pensioners. Items may be dropped off at the shop in Samora Machel (Aliwal) Street, or call 031 332 3721 for collection of large loads.

Donate/ fundraise - If you really can't give of your time, you can still be involved in Mandela Day by making a special donation towards our work. Simply give online by credit card or Instant EFT by clicking on the donate tab on the tafta website.

Is your heart bigger than your pocket? Then why not launch your own fundraising drive and collect donations for Tafta from family and friends? Siblings Ronald and Shayna are running the Mandela Marathon in aid of Tafta and are asking friends to sponsor them through a page on GivenGain. For more information about their Tafta mission, visithttps://www.givengain.com/ap/runningkin/. You could run, cycle, swim – or create your own fun event like bungee jumping or skydiving – and raise funds towards the care of Durban's seniors.
The Mercury