Durban - From July 1, passenger boarding calls at the King Shaka International Airport will be made in domestic departures check-in areas and boarding gates area. This, according to KSIA spokesperson Colin Naidoo, is to ensure there is a consistent service delivery to passengers.
This means that limited boarding calls will be made in front of international departures boarding gates, in keeping with global trends of silent airports with passengers becoming increasingly self-sufficient. The standard operating procedures for most domestic flights require that passengers start boarding at least 30 minutes before the scheduled departure time and one hour for international travellers.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


"From July 1, public address microphones at the domestic departures gates will be switched off and only limited use of the public-address microphones will be allowed at the international departures gates. The aim of the project is to improve comfort levels of the waiting areas and to reduce the stress of travelling," he said. 

Passengers are encouraged to check their boarding passes and the flight information display boards for boarding times. The only instances where centralised terminal announcements will be made will be for irregular operations such as gate changes, flight time changes, security matters, system failures,
emergencies and customer service anomalies such as lost minors.
Naidoo said Airports Company South Africa began implementing the ‘silent airport’ concept several months ago and it has been welcomed by passengers. 
The objective is not only to minimise background noise and but also the sense of hurry at the terminal by reducing the number of announcements.
"Airports Company South Africa’s airports compete globally and we are adopting the global trend of silent airports. We have listened to our concerns of our passengers and are reducing the noise footprint within our airport. Passengers should check their boarding passes and the flight information display boards for boarding times, gates and any other changes,” Naidoo said. 
The Mercury