Durban - The eThekwini Municipality believes they are ready to host the Comrades Marathon this year. On Sunday, thousands of runners will take part in the down run from Pietermaritzburg and finish at the Moses Mabhida Stadium. 
According to Metro Police spokesperson, Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad, routes will be monitored by CCTV cameras, marshalls, police and a helicopter. Security personnel will be also deployed along the route.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"“Motorists can expect a few traffic delays, congestion and road closures along the planned route. We appeal to all motorists to display patience and plan their routes carefully, obey all police instructions and heed all road closures," he said. 
Sewpersad cautioned motorists to ensure that their vehicles are not parked illegally or they would be towed and not to leave valuables visible in the vehicle. 
Road closures will start from 5am, as the runners enter the western areas of eThekwini.


Around the Moses Mabhida Stadium, road closures and barricading will start from Bram Fischer and Masabalala Yengwa, to create a secure ‘home straight’ for the runners, all the way to Moses Mabhida Stadium.
Athletes will be running contra flow on Old Main Road to M13, and will join the N3 from Sherwood. They will proceed down the N3, and take the new ‘Fly Over’ to David Webster (Leopold St) which continues as Bram Fischer Rd (Ordnance Rd). And then turn left into Masabalala Yengwa (NMR Avenue) to end at the Moses Mabhida Stadium for the first time. 

Sewpersad cautioned motorists to ensure that their vehicles are not parked illegally or they would be towed and not to leave valuables visible in the vehicle. 

Road closures will start from 05h00, as the runners enter the western areas of eThekwini.

Around the Moses Mabhida Stadium, road closures and barricading will start from Bram Fischer and Masabalala Yengwa, to create a secure ‘home straight’ for the runners, all the way to Moses Mabhida Stadium.

Members of the public wishing to view the race or meet athletes at the finishing line should take note of the following route into Durban to avoid delays:

Take the N3 towards Durban and at the E B Cloete Interchange (otherwise known as Spaghetti Junction) take the N2 north towards Umhlanga/King Shaka Airport. Take the Umgeni Road (Exit 170) Interchange fly over and proceed along Umgeni Road, passing Makro on your right hand side. After 4km turn left into Smiso Nkwanyana Road and then right into Masabalala Yengwa Avenue. From here various advertised parking options will be available for you to use. 

Parking areas include the at Sahara Cricket Stadium, Johnson Kings Park Rugby Stadium, Athletic Stadium, Kings Park Swimming pools, Durban Country Club and People’s Park with access via Sandile Thusi (Argyle) Road.

The Mercury