Durban - Embattled municipal manager of the Msunduzi municipality, Sizwe Hadebe, survived for another day on Wednesday as ANC councillors used their majority in the council to block attempts to place him on precautionary suspension while he is being investigated.
But the council resolved to delegate powers to mayor Themba Njilo to appoint a law firm to investigate allegations of wrongdoing against Hadebe.

At the municipality's full council meeting, the first of this month, dragged on for hours and had several items involving lengthy agenda documents.

This was because two previous meetings had been cancelled due to lack of a quorum as the majority of ANC councillors were not present.

The opposition parties had viewed the failed meetings as a deliberate attempt by the party to protect Hadebe from any ­action.

However, the Hadebe issue was the pressing matter, with ANC and opposition party councillors discussing it behind closed doors, only coming out for 15-minute breaks to caucus.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Hadebe has been under pressure for the past few months after a recording was made public of what is believed to be his voice, instructing a junior official to fix interview scores so a candidate who was preferred by politicians could be appointed. 

Also, managers under him have written to the national and provincial departments of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs calling for an investigation into how he is running the municipality.

Unions have also written to the council complaining about Hadebe. 

Njilo had sought a legal opinion on how to handle the growing scandals involving Hadebe, which was finally ­tabled before councillors on Wednesday.

However it was evident that ANC councillors were divided over how to deal with Hadebe, despite the vote to not suspend him. Several ANC councillors could be overhead complaining about having to toe the party line in protecting ­Hadebe, with one saying: “If he is corrupt, he must face the music.”

Some opposition parties were so frustrated by the process that they walked out at one point.

The council resolved, in terms of the legal opinion, that an attorney be appointed to investigate the allegations of misconduct, to ascertain the authenticity and the source of the recording and the veracity of the content.

Also, to determine whether any action should be taken against the city manager in terms of the Local Government Disciplinary regulations.

The council further resolved that Njilo should within seven days appoint the investigator, who should within 30 days report their findings. 

IFP leader Thinasonke Ntombela said that while they were uncomfortable that those accused of wrongdoing would remain in the office, they felt due process must be followed.

DA leader Sibongiseni ­Majola said they were happy that the legal process had finally started. 

“These are very serious allegations. We hope that the investigator will have an open-door policy and will welcome documented evidence of wrongdoing that we might have,” he said.

Njilo told reporters that he was happy to have tabled the opinion. 

“There were these stories that I was supporting the MM (Hadebe) and dragging my feet. I am happy that this matter is finally with the council and that it will be handled by council.

“The councillors accepted the report and the recommendations and we will continue from there, and I will appoint an investigator to look at the matter. 

“What I want is for ­people in this city to trust us,” Njilo said. 

He added that he would inform Hadebe of the council’s decisions. 

Attempts to reach Hadebe for comment were not successful. 
The Mercury