Durban - Snow watchers will be thrilled to know that, according to Snow Report SA, the cold front heading to the province at the weekend, is likely to bring a blanket of snow across the country. 

Posting on their Facebook page, Snow Report SA said on July 1 (Sunday) a cold front will arrive on the shores of the Western Cape. 

"By Sunday evening, we should see some snow fall over the peaks of the majority of Cape mountains. We may see more than 15 cm on some ranges including those of Hottentots Holland, Cederberg, Matroosberg and the Boland mountain range. At the same time Northern Cape areas such as Sutherland, Calvinia and Fraserberg are expected to receive snow, reaching up as far as Springbok by Monday morning," said Snow Report SA. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
They added that as the cold front moves east, the Eastern Cape should receive its fair share of snow, with the heaviest falls being predicted for the Lady Grey and Barkly East areas and surrounds. Hogsback is also likely to receive some snow although for now, only light falls are predicted for this region. 


"By Monday afternoon the cold front should bring the snow into many parts of Lesotho. Sani mountain top is likely to get some snow if the cold front holds course, late Monday evening or early hours of Tuesday morning. We could very well see some snow pushing in to KZN this time round with falls predicted for Underberg, Mooi River, Rosetta and Impendle." 

Snow Report SA said they hope that the cold front holds its course.
"Should thing change over the next few days, we will be sure to let our community know. Extremely cold temperatures are expected right across the country with this front, and we are expecting the SAWS to issue warnings in this regard. Farmers should take note of the warnings and take the necessary precautions, especially with regards to live stock. Cross fingers, hold thumbs and put the heater on folks, it’s going to be a COLD one! We will keep an eye on this system, and will update again if there are significant changes to the forecast," said Snow Report SA. 
 Did you know you can follow us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram
The Mercury