Durban - Airports Company South Africa is calling on the public to give their comment and proposals for the renaming of four national and international airports in SA. 

Cape Town International Airport, East London Airport, Port Elizabeth International Airport and Kimberley Airport are subject to renaming as part of government’s Transformation of Heritage Landscape programme.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The renaming will be implemented in terms of the South African Geographical Names Council Act of 1998 (Act No. 118 of 1998). The Minister of Arts and Culture is responsible for the approval of geographical names after receiving recommendations from the South African Geographical Names Council (SAGNC). The SAGNC is responsible for geographical features of national concern including towns, cities, suburbs and any form of human settlement, post offices, stations, highways, airports and government dams

An application will be made to the relevant Geographical Names Provincial Committee for processing by Airports Company South Africa . These committees will verify that the applications comply with the guidelines in the national Handbook on Geographical Names.  This will include checking that the name is not offensive or a duplication of an existing one.

The provincial committees will then forward the applications to the SAGNC. The council will then take a decision on the form or forms of names and recommend them for the Minister of Arts and Culture’s approval.

Once the names have been approved by the Minister they will then be published in the Government Gazette. A period of 30 days is required for any objections to be submitted in response to the Government Gazette.  Should any objections be received, the Minister of Arts and Culture will assess them before a final decision is published in the Government Gazette.

The Department of Transport and Airports Company South Africa will then implement the official names as soon as possible. Proposals and comments should be sent to Airports Company South Africa by close of business on Wednesday June 6. Proposals and comments may be sent by e-mail to Corporate.Affairs@airports.co.za or hand-delivered to the Airports Company South Africa office at the nearest airport.
The Mercury