Durban - Durban tycoon and chairperson of Sibaya Casino, Vivian Reddy, has vowed to fight the roll-out of electronic bingo terminals (EBTs) at shopping malls, saying if needs be he is prepared to take the matter all the way to the Constitutional Court.
Reddy was speaking to The Mercury after the Pietermaritzburg High Court declared that Afrisun KZN, which trades as Sibaya Casino and Entertainment Kingdom, could pursue an application to review a decision to approve the roll-out of 650 bingo machines at various locations in KwaZulu-Natal, mostly shopping centres.

Malls at which the machines were to be rolled out included The Pavilion (50 machines), Gateway Theatre of Shopping (50), South Coast Mall (90), Galleria (50) and Brookside Mall in Pietermaritzburg.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The issue caused a stir with some activists arguing that this would lead more people into gambling and that shopping centres were to be turned into mini casinos.

Giving a background to the matter, Judge Piet Koen in his judgment delivered last Friday said the KZN Gaming and Betting Board had on January 16, 2015 passed a resolution to approve various applications by bingo operators.

On January 30, 2015 the then premier of the province and MEC for finance had launched an application seeking a review of the decision, and to interdict the Gambling and Gaming Board from “issuing such licences as amended or from processing them”.

The application was made after finance MEC Belinda Scott had suspended some members of the Gaming and Gambling Board for approving the licences. 

At the time Scott said they had “acted against the MEC and the provincial government’s explicit intention of regulating the gambling industry in a fair procedural, moral and legal manner in KZN.”

On February 3 and 4, 2015 Afrisun and the People’s Forum Against Electronic Bingo Terminals approached the court for leave to intervene in the review application by the premier and finance MEC.

However, Premier Willies Mchunu, who had replaced Senzo Mchunu as premier, later withdrew the application after allegedly facilitating a settlement between the parties.

“Mr Willies Mchunu states that he had familiarised himself with the litigation and took legal and other advice from various quarters, and formed the view that the matter should be settled. It’s also alleged in the respondent’s papers that the MEC agreed with this decision of the premier, “ said Judge Koen.

But Afrisun had disputed the validity of the withdrawal of the application by the premier and the MEC and sought the right to continue pursuing the review in its own right as a co-applicant in the main application. 

Some of the bingo operators had questioned Afrisun’s and the forum’s locus standi to continue with the matter. 

However, Judge Koen said there was initially no opposition to Afrisun’s application for leave to intervene in the matter.

“The opposition only commenced when Afrisun sought to seek additional relief on more extensive grounds to that which the premier and the MEC had sought and relied upon, and when it applied to join various manufacturers of EBTs to the main review.”

Speaking to The Mercury, Reddy said they had undertaken the legal challenge because the process to approve the rollout of the machines had been flawed, among other reasons. 

Sham Maharaj, chairperson of the People’s Forum Against EBTs, said that the intended roll-out of bingo ­machines at shopping centres would have dire consequences if it went ahead.

“There will be tremendous problems, the poor will become poorer.”
The Mercury