Durban - Readers of all ages are in for a feast as the Durban Book Fair launches on Sunday at Mitchell Park. The initiative is promoted by the Mitchell Park Trust in association with #HashtagBooks and The Mercury as a media partner.
The monthly affair will take place every first Sunday at the popular bandstand adjacent to the Blue Zoo restaurant. Funds raised from the hire of bookseller stalls will go towards the Trust’s conservation and education efforts. A stellar attraction on Sunday at 11am will be gregarious artist and educator, Mama Nomusa. 
Good Life caught up with her to get a feel for what she offers and what’s in store for those making their way to the park

Finish the sentence “I am” - A storyteller! I come from a long line of storytellers. Both my grandfathers, great grandmother, father, uncles and aunts were all dramatic, innovative, creative and funny storytellers. They held forth every Friday night at our house on Chicago’s West Side.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads



To whom do you tell stories? - Since expanding my base to include Durban in 2009, my audiences have been more adult; including corporate clients, librarian seminars, teacher in-services, NGO training as well as students. When I was in the US it was mainly students.



Would you say your performances are geared for adults? - Not at all. My work includes everybody from toddlers to grandparents.



What is the spirit of a storyteller? - To be a storyteller is a calling, a gift. When I am on stage it is a  magical experience. It is a real opportunity to teach, learn and pass on stories of the past while co-creating with my audiences new ones for the future.  Each performance is highly energised and unique. I feel most alive when I am on stage. It’s wonderful!



How long is a typical storytelling session with Mama Nomusa? - It is approximately an hour of stories, songs and games accompanied by the African Mbira and African Shekere musical instruments. The sessions are fast-paced and interactive. The line between storyteller and audience is intentionally blurred to give an uplifting, thoughtful and educational experience that is guaranteed to leave you smiling.



Any favourites? - I particularly enjoy what I call Power Stories - those that have the ability to teach and entertain at the same time.



What does one leave your session with? - My tag line is “Stories to inspire, empower, entertain”. I tell stories that have depth, character, that are uplifting and often with a twist. They are the kind of stories not easily forgotten as rhythm and rhyme are frequently used. Generally they are stories you have never heard before and are not likely to forget. Adults and children alike frequently sing the songs and tell the stories long after the performance is over.



What else do you do? - I run workshops on storytelling, innovative teacher training techniques and special seminars on request. Those are detailed on my website www.mamanomusa.biznessweb.com



Tell us about your “South African connection”? - My connection with this beautiful country goes back decades. My husband, Ndikho Xaba, is a legendary keyboardist and instrument maker who reluctantly left apartheid South Africa for the US in the mid-1960s. After we married, I was exposed to all facets of South African exile life. He was an enthusiastic proponent of the African Renaissance.



You call yourself an international storyteller. Why? - Because I have been fortunate enough to live and perform all over the world; from San Francisco, California; East Orange, New Jersey; Providence, Rhode Island; New York, New York; Washington DC; Chicago, Illinois; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Toronto, Ontario; Morogoro, Tanzania; performing at international storytelling events in Bangalore, India; Cayman Islands; Pretoria, to now living and working in Durban. The world is truly my oyster!
The Mercury