Durban - Well-known “walker” Jan Mabuyakhulu who embarks on lengthy journeys across the province to raise awareness about violence against women and children, has himself become a victim of crime.
On his latest trip, the 45-year-old had planned to walk 217km from Mtubatuba, a town north of Richards Bay, to Durban.

He began his walk at the beginning of June, but just three days into his campaign, Mabuyakhulu was robbed by knife-wielding criminals in Richards Bay. 

“Four men with knives took my backpack with clothes, two flags, bank cards and my identity book. Almost R600 was stolen,” said Mabuyakhulu.

He had to return home to Mtubatuba to get more supplies before recommencing his campaign. 

Against the objections of his wife, Mabuyakhulu said he would continue with the journey.

“I want to plant a seed of humanity. We have to love our children. We have to love our girlfriends, we have to love our mothers, not rape, murder and make them afraid of us, we have to protect them,” Mabuyakhulu said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The idea for his campaign was born in 2013 when two children from Mabuyakhulu's church were raped and killed.

“I started thinking of a way to tell these criminals that this is not allowed,” he said.

The father of five said his heart broke when he heard about the murder of 9-year-old Sadia Sukhraj, who died in a botched hijacking in Shallcross last month. 
“My heart broke when I heard about Sadia. She could have been a future doctor or president. It was painful for me,” he said.

Mabuyakhulu said his only wish was to see South Africa as a country free of crime where there are no criminals, and there is no need to kill or hurt someone.

“Like I saw in the Comrades Marathon. People were one. Like they were from one country. They love and care about each other. If we act like them, we can create change,” he said.

KwaDukuza mayor Ricardo Mthembu has sponsored three days of accommodation for Mabuyakhulu, while Mtubatuba municipality and ward councillor, Luka Mkhwanazi, sponsored tracksuits and money for food.

“Because of lack of sponsorship, some nights people along the way offered me accommodation, but there were days that I had to take a taxi back home and return by taxi the next day, to the same spot, to continue walking,” said Mabuyakhulu. 

A case of robbery was opened at Richards Bay police station.

“No arrest has been made at this stage,” said SAPS spokesperson Thulani Zwane.
The Mercury