Durban - Participating in the Comrades Marathon with a friend ensures that you have someone to motivate you along the way, but for this year’s three wheelchair participants, their friends will be doing much more than motivating them.
Wheelchair participant Grant Adams will be attempting his first Comrades - with the assistance of his friend and supporter, Andrew Murray.

Adams, 40, a former marketing director who is happily married with two children, was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis about 11 years ago. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The two got the idea to do the race when Adams told Murray that running was one of the things he had missed the most since he had lost some of his mobility.

The two other wheelchair participants are no strangers to the race, with both Anita Engelbrecht and Chaeli Mycroft having taken part before.

Engelbrecht will be pushed by Hilton Murray while Mycroft will have the assistance of Stuart Cullum and Mark Ferreira.

Engelbrecht successfully completed the 2016 Comrades in a time of 10:57:51, earning a Comrades bronze medal, while Mycroft holds two Comrades medals, a bronze and a Vic Clapham, after completing the last two editions of the race, thanks to commitment and her dedicated wheelchair assistants.

Mycroft, a 23-year-old ability activist with cerebral palsy, was awarded the International Children’s Peace Prize in 2011.

Engelbrecht, 25, who has cerebral palsy, graduated from Stellenbosch University with a B Com degree in management accounting, and is  completing her honours through the University of South Africa.

She has also participated in the Cape Town Cycle Tour, the Red Hill Marathon and the Two Oceans ultra marathon.

US self-propelled wheelchair participant, Jean Altomari, will also be participating, and will be attempting to win a Comrades Back-to-Back Medal this year, after earning a Comrades bronze medal in last year’s Up Run, which she completed in a time of 10:16:50.

Visually impaired athlete, Mandla Zwane of Nongoma in northern KZN, will be running his 12th Comrades this year. 

He has become quite a personality among the Comrades community, after disclosing that for a large part of his Comrades running career, he had been guided only by the footsteps of the runners in front of him.
The Mercury