The city’s leadership has called for emergency measures to deal with a massive sewage headache as thousands of pit toilets in residents’ homes in areas such as Besters and KwaMashu north of Durban have not been emptied.
A report tabled at the city’s executive committee on Tuesday states that the Venti­lated ­Improved Pit (VIP) toilets in Wards 54 and 47 should be emptied to curb the potential spread of disease and pollution of the environment.

It further warns that the city, if it does not address the situation, may risk being taken to court. 

“If the current situation pertaining to the VIPs that remain full in Wards 54 and 47 is not addressed urgently, this will be in violation of the constitutional right to basic sanitation and a violation of the Section 9 equality clause that requires that there be no ­unfair discrimination in the provision of services,” reads the report.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The city said it had received numerous complaints from residents who had been subjected to inhumane conditions, prompting city manager Sipho Nzuza to make a site inspection last Friday.

Briefing the committee on what he had witnessed, Nzuza said: “It was a shock when I got in there, it was something I had never seen The houses were full of faeces. 

“It was terrible, and there were little kids playing around in that environment. I just said to myself this is a disaster waiting to happen,” Nzuza told the committee.

He was making the case for the increase in the value of a  R40million contract to drain about 21000 such toilets across the city.

Following exco’s approval, the contract value will now be increased by R23million to include 12432 more toilets to be emptied at the original contract rate of R1850 per toilet.

The three-year contract was awarded in the 2016/2017 financial year, and has a year and a half remaining. 

According to the report, there are more than 48000 such toilets in eThekwini, but the figure could be much higher as there seems to be no reliable data on this.

The city’s water and sanitation department has committed to undertake an audit to validate and confirm the exact number of toilets that have to be emptied, versus those reported by councillors.

Problems

Mayor Zandile Gumede said some of the problems were that the honeysucker (the specialised truck used to empty the toilets by sucking up the contents) cannot reach some of the houses. She said the houses were built by the previous government and could not be blamed on the ANC government.

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi applauded Nzuza for visiting the affected wards and households, saying that if he had not gone there “maybe some people were going to take to the streets”.

Councillor Mondli Mthembu said the conditions that some of the affected residents were subjected to were unacceptable.

Nzuza said he was also taken to L section in KwaMashu, where some of the toilets were half-built, while some houses there were without any toilets.