Durban - KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu and members of his provincial cabinet will descend on the Ugu District Municipality on Thursday in a bid to resolve a stalemate that has left residents without water for ­almost two weeks.
On Tuesday, Mchunu met with mayors of the local municipalities within Ugu as part of the provincial government’s efforts to resolve the matter. 

This was preceded by the deployment of the Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, and Community Safety and Liaison MECs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube and Mxolisi Kaunda respectively.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Ugu spokesperson France Zama said it had been decided that a special executive committee meeting be convened where it was resolved to recommend to the cabinet that Ugu be considered a disaster area. 

“This will unlock technical and financial resources that will help us to alleviate the problem. Right now we are incurring costs that were not budgeted for, and for which we will need to account,” said Zama. 

A chunk of the costs were going to security, water tankers and to contracting private service providers to man and manage pump stations that had been abandoned by workers. There were also repairs to be done on infrastructure that was being damaged daily, he said. 

Municipal manager Dhanpalan Naidoo said seven cases had been opened by the municipality for the damage of their property during industrial action that has plagued the municipality for at least two years. 

The latest case was opened last week. 

Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed that Port Shepstone police were investigating a case of tampering or destruction of infrastructure. 

Zama said about 300 technical staff had embarked on the work stoppage after their salaries were docked. “This emanates from a no work, no pay principle for employees who engaged in an ­illegal strike last year. This was agreed upon with the union and employees were ­advised.”

Last year’s strike action had been over workers’ demands for the municipality to pay them back contributions they had made towards a compulsory group life scheme that has since been cancelled. 

Although this is an insurance that would ordinarily only pay out in the event of death, the municipality relented and paid out a total of almost R20million between 2016 and last year. 

“Employees are demanding we reverse the implementation of no work, no pay. They also want us to allow unlimited overtime, but we are trying to regulate it since our overtime expenditure is too high,” Zama said.

He said the most contentious issue was that of the suspension of 11 South African Municipal Workers Union shop stewards for disrupting a meeting. 

“These illegal strikes are characterised by a high level of tampering with infrastructure, leaving the district unable to provide a basic service.”

According to a municipal update to residents, Margate, Izingolweni, Nositha, parts of Ramsgate and Southbroom, and Murchison were without water Wednesday. 

More water tankers had started operating Wednesday, starting by servicing the Murchison Hospital. 
The Mercury