Durban - With the school term having just ended and families across the country preparing to depart on holiday, thoughts turn to dealing with pets.
For many people, a house sitter is an option. For others, going away means having to put Rex or Rover in the kennels.

Kennelling is a good idea but, be warned, many of the kennels may be booked far in advance, so make your preparations in good time. 

Kennelling is a safe option, but beware of one thing, and that is kennel cough. Kennel cough is a highly contagious disease and can spread easily wherever dogs meet; out walking, in training class, at a dog show and in kennels.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The signs are a dry hacking cough, often with retching. In the more severe cases, the dog will be unwell and will go off his or her food. 

Some mild cases will get better within a week without treatment while other sicker pets may require cough syrup to reduce the irritation. In some cases antibiotics may be needed. 

Kennel cough is caused by multiple strains of viruses and bacteria, such as Canine parainfulenza virus, Canine adenovirus and Bordetella bronchiseptica, much like our common colds.

If you suspect that your dog has kennel cough do not allow him (or her) to come in to contact with other dogs. Keep him calm in a warm environment. Cold air, excitement and exercise will make the cough worse. 

If your dog is in contact with other dogs regularly or is going into kennels be sure to get him vaccinated about two weeks before he will be with other dogs. 

The vaccine is intranasal (squirted up the nose) and lasts for one year before a booster dose is needed. 

Most (if not all) kennels do require proof of vaccination history before admitting any animal.

This protects everyone and ensures the environment is safe for all guests. 

If you have not been keeping up with vaccinations, consult a vet as soon as possible to ensure your dog is treated. 

If you are planning on going on holiday later in the year, now is a good time to check vaccinations, and also start looking around for suitable kennels for your pet. 

Many families like to take their pets with them while travelling and on holiday. If you are going to do this, it is equally important that your dog (or cat) is vaccinated, and ready for the trip.

There are a variety of vehicle aids available on the market which will make the trip easier for you and your pet. It is important to do proper research on these - and test them before you go on a long trip.

While driving, it is critical to stop every two hours or 200km - not only for your own safety, but to allow your pet to stretch their legs, have a toilet break and get some fresh air. 

Please check ahead that your planned accommodation allows pets; too many people assume this is the case without first making sure, only to find they have a problem when they get to their destination.

An important rule of travelling with pets is to always stay calm in the car, and to ensure the journey is enjoyable for everyone.
The Mercury