Durban - The EFF has accused the DA of trying to intimidate and silence its leader, Julius Malema, after the latter party reported him to the SA Human Rights Commission for claiming that the majority of Indians “hate Africans”.
The SAHRC confirmed receiving a complaint from the DA.

“I can confirm that the SAHRC has received one complaint on Malema’s comments from this past weekend. The SAHRC is assessing the matter and will make a decision in due course,” commission spokesperson Gail Smith said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

DA leader Mmusi Maimane told The Mercury they had approached the SAHRC because it stood for a “South Africa for all”.

“I will never be able to compromise on the principle of a non-racial South Africa, the vision that I hold and I’m fighting for,” said Maimane.  

However, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said the party was not concerned about any reprisals against Malema because his comment was addressing racial challenges in the country, especially in KwaZulu-Natal.

He said Malema was expressing the EFF’s collective views about how African people were suffering at the hands of their Indian counterparts.

Ndlozi said the EFF was unmoved by the DA’s complaint because Malema had not violated anyone’s rights. He said Malema was raising “an open and honest debate about race relationships in South Africa”.

“It is not the first time (Malema has raised such issues), and those who are unable to engage and respond often turn to the institution (SAHRC) to intimidate and silence him,”  said Ndlozi.

Malema raised eyebrows at the EFF’s Youth Day commemoration rally in Matlosana in North West on Saturday when he said most Indians in South Africa were racist.

“The majority of Indians hate Africans, the majority of Indians are racist, and we must never be scared to say that they are racists. I’m not saying all Indians, I’m saying the majority of them.

“Africans and Indians do not marry each other because the majority of those Indians see us as subhuman,” he added.

Ndlozi said Malema had done nothing wrong as he had not called for violence against Indians.

“He never called for any slaughter. We are calling for a change of attitude, of the way in which they (Indians) think of African people and relate to African people, and the way in which they relate to black struggle in general,” Ndlozi said.

He added that major political parties in KwaZulu-Natal had not been honest about the suffering of African people.

“We are doing our part to raise these matters sharply, and we are doing so because this is what the EFF is about.”

He said he was disappointed that the EFF’s concern about Indians’ anti-African sentiments had been misinterpreted as an attempt to attract African votes for next year’s general elections.

“When we first raised these matters last year we were having our fourth anniversary in Durban, and there were no elections,” he noted.

At the party anniversary last year, Malema said: “The political parties in this province are in the pockets of Indian families. If you are Indian and you pay people well and respect your fellow human beings don’t worry. If not you must know that you are no friend of ours. We do not want our people exploited.”

Ndlozi said that despite Malema’s statement, the EFF would campaign in former Indian communities to vote for it next year.

“We are about making South Africa a better country to live in,” Ndlozi stated.

DA KZN MP Haniff Hoosen advised Malema to use his leadership influence to build bridges rather than break them.
The Mercury