Durban - MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs Sihle Zikalala has called for the suspension of “gold” mining activities in Machi, Harding, saying those who continue to mine or sell the stones would be arrested.
Zilakala, who is also the leader of Government Business, visited the area on Sunday to calm tensions between residents fighting over the rights to mine. The Machi area has been under the spotlight for the past two weeks after a “gold” substance was discovered in Mbuthuma by road construction workers.

This has attracted interest from thousands of people, who travelled from as far as Johannesburg, Durban, Pietermaritzburg and the Eastern Cape.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Read: WATCH: ‘Gold rush’ chaos in KZN

“The MEC held a meeting with all the stakeholders, including the local amakhosi and mayors.

“Geologists were also at the mine today and took samples of what is on the site for further testing,” said Zikalala’s spokesperson Bongani Tembe.

“Some samples were taken about a week ago and more are being taken today and we expect that the official results will be available in two or three months’ time,” said Tembe.

Sealed off

Zikalala had ordered the site to be sealed off.

“He wants the mining to stop while this process is unfolding,” Tembe said.

The police tried to seal the site with barbed wire last week, but the community broke the fence and continued to mine.

“This mining is creating a lot of challenges. Learners are no longer going to school because they are busy with mining and selling what they get there.

“There is the issue of criminality, there are people who are painting these rocks and selling them as ‘gold’. The MEC wants the people who are mining, selling and buying these rocks to be arrested,” said Tembe. However, Tembe said people should not view the intervention by Zikalala as an attempt by government to take over the community’s resources, he said.

“The mining has also led to tensions between community members. This area has several traditional leaders and people from those areas are coming there to mine," he said.
Zikalala said the provincial government was worried that the “gold” rush had also led to children missing classes. 
“We have been told that some children no longer go to school. They spend the whole day at the mine and sell stones. This has to end. We have been assured by the law enforcement agencies that the decisions we have taken today will be enforced.”



The signs of tension were evident last week when people from Mbuthuma, who regard themselves as the “custodians” of the mine, were upset that people continued mining the area despite a directive to stop.

They mobilised and went to the site armed with sticks and removed those at the site.

Ward councillor Hopewell Ngubelanga said the area will now be fenced off to make it difficult to get in.

“There is an agreement in place and no one is mining now,” he said.

The Mercury