Durban - With sales on entrance tickets and bookings at hospitality venues reaching fever pitch, all signs point to another sell-out Vodacom Durban July at Greyville Racecourse on July 7.

Construction of the massive marquees that make up the legendary Marquee Village is scheduled to be completed by Friday, allowing plenty of time for the décor teams commissioned by the hospitality service providers to weave their magic and add their unique interpretation of the raceday theme “It Is Time”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In all, 30 separate marquees will be built, all offering a wide range of hospitality options for around 13 000 eager race goers, in addition to the existing hospitality suites in the main grandstand. Around 3 500 chefs, waitrons and hospitality staff will man the various hospitality venues, each of which is responsible for its own food, drink, décor and entertainment.

Many have already confirmed entertainment line-ups that include superstars of the local music scene, celebrity guest MCs and A-list guests from every corner of the country.

While Vivian Reddy, who has set the bar high in terms of standards of hospitality at the Vodacom Durban July for a number of years, will be conspicuous by his absence this year, many of the top-end hospitality offerings will aim to set a new notable high for raceday hospitality.

Gold Circle has confirmed that the annual competition to spotlight the best hospitality venue will continue this year, with judges scouting all the venues before deciding on the winners of this prestigious prize.

To assist guests in finding their way around the Marquee Village, event staff with distinctive "Ask Me" t-shirts will be on hand to direct guests to the hospitality venues they are looking for.

Event World, the company that manages all the hospitality at the Vodacom Durban July report that there has been strong demand at all levels of hospitality on offer, from the elite VVIP lounges to the popular picnic sites.

“We have added new picnic site areas to carter for the demand,” said Event World’s Nellie Mhlongo.

“There’s been major increase in demand for the picnic sites over the past two weeks and lots of excitement over the upgraded Public Area,” she added.

The main stage area, that is the focus of the fashion programme, will give way to a number of top-selling music acts as the day wears on, ensuring that Africa’s Greatest Horseracing event ends on a high note.
The Mercury