Durban - Three unions representing Eskom workers rejected the power utility’s offer of a 4.7% increase, forcing negotiations into a third day.
While the National Union of Metalworkers of SA, National Union of Mineworkers and Solidarity tabled their counter-proposal at a meeting, they remained mum about their latest demands.

Eskom was expected to report back with a new offer this morning. 

Numsa general secretary Irvin Jim said if the feedback from Eskom “looks good and makes sense, we might have to take it back to our members. But if we feel it doesn’t, then we might have to take a view 
as to what is our attitude towards that.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He would not reveal much about the new proposal from the unions but said the three unions had consolidated their positions on all issues and had presented a comprehensive proposal to Eskom.

“It was not only focusing on wages. We presented solid feedback that deals with all Eskom challenges and we were grappling with what must be done to fix the Eskom balance sheet. In our view if all those issues that we are not at liberty to talk about are fixed, then Eskom will be strengthened.”

Solidarity and the NUM said all parties wanted to conclude the process, not delay it. 

NUM chief negotiator Helen Diatile said there were a lot of concessions made by the unions.

Numsa had also been demanding that Eskom should do away with power purchase agreements entered into with Independent Power Producers (IPPs) which the union feels will result in job losses and the price of electricity rising.

Numsa had also been calling for the management of Eskom to be slashed, saying it is too bloated and that cuts would save costs.

The impasse over the salary increase came to a boil last week when workers downed tools and picketed outside Eskom offices nationally with Numsa demanding a 15% increase, while the power utility said it could not afford any increase.

There were claims that some of the workers had sabotaged infrastructure and threatened fellow workers, leading to load shedding. The parties only went back to 
negotiations after Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan intervened and instructed Eskom to make an offer to the workers.

Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe said the new demands would be taken to the board and the executive committee for consideration and Eskom would report back today.

“Our position as Eskom is that we are not going to negotiate with the unions through the media. All of us want to resolve this impasse as soon as possible,” Phasiwe said.

Economist Dawie Roodt warned that the power utility could not afford any increase.

“The fact is, and this is not my opinion but it is a fact, that too many people are working at Eskom and they are paid too much and that has to be fixed,” he said.

Roodt further warned that the intervention by Gordhan last week could be seen as undermining the authority of the new Eskom board.

“That was wrong and it sets a wrong precedent. What is going to happen at SAA now? Are the workers there also going to go on strike and shut down all the airports? You have the new Eskom board that is trying to fix Eskom and what the minister did was to undermine its authority.”
The Mercury