Durban - In commemoration of Youth Day, the KwaMashu YMCA has planned a day of creative fun aimed at reinvigorating their presence in the area. Saturday, hundreds of youngsters are expected to take part in the activities.
Youth co-ordinator, Sanele Makhathini, said they have organised the event, in partnership with young people from the Pink region (Phoenix, Inanda, Ntuzuma and KwaMashu) to showcase their talent. 

“The aim of the event is to change the mindset of young people because young people think that June 16 is just a normal holiday and don’t understand the concept behind June 16. We want to educate them so they use this day to showcase their talent. The YMCA creates the platform for young people to show off their talent,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

General secretary of the greater Durban YMCA, Ian Booth, said the YMCA offers young people a host of other projects. 
Also read: Cape Flats moms miss lost sons ahead of #YouthDay

“We have an aftercare programme called the Y Zone which operates on seven different sites around the city that provides aftercare and linked to the Y Zone, is a programme called TEEEP, The Economic Entrepreneur Education Program. This is aimed at kids in primary school and it’s to teach them how to manage money and how to save. 

“We have a youth justice program which has several components to it. We were in high schools in a dialogue prevention programme to make sure that we do not meet those kids in prison one day,” he said. 

Booth said they also have reformative programmes in prisons. “Another programme that we have is what we call ‘local action’ groups. The local action groups are in a particular community, generally in communities where the YMCA already works so we have a connection with young people. 

“The way the local action group works is to recruit a group of six young people. Their first task is to do a community survey, what is the biggest need in your community and then they have six months to have a programme in place to meet that need,” Booth said. 
Also read: #YouthDay: Misery of youth on the street

Issues

Booth said the biggest issue facing the youth today is that of unemployment. 

“Linked to youth unemployment is skills. One of the biggest issues is that we have bucket loads of money going into Setas but you can only access Seta money if you’re employed because the Setas are paid through companies.

“You can only develop skills if someone employs you. They will not employ you because you do not have skills. There is a little bit of a disconnect there and somehow we need to get that gap bridged.

“Because the Setas are sitting on a bunch of money and we’re sitting with a bunch of young people who need skills, we have to find a way to unlock that. What for me is important is the youth need to feel that they are being heard and their feelings and views validated and that generally does not happen,” he said. 

Booth added that on a recent trip to India, he found that young people there have similar issues.  

He said the youth said: “People do not listen to us, people are not interested in our views, they ignore us if we speak in meetings.” 

“So how do we encourage young people to be active participants in society. We only do that when we listen to them and we validate their views otherwise they are not going to speak and they will be antisocial rather than committed citizens,” Booth said. 

The KwaMashu creative fun showcase Youth Day event takes place at the KwaMashu YMCA on Saturday from 10am until 4pm. Entry is on a donation basis - minimum contribution is R5.
The Mercury