CCTV footage from a business in Craighall, taken on the evening of April 24, shows how a gang of criminals broke into and raided three vehicles in just three minutes with absolute ease, all in plain sight of passing motorists. 

Theft from motor vehicles is a prevailing issue in South Africa, with the Statistics South Africa 2016/17 Victims of Crime Survey stating that 139 433 of these crimes took place in one year. That’s an average of 382 incidents a day. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“With roughly 16 incidents of theft from a motor vehicle every hour, South African vehicle owners have to be vigilant”, says Maanda Tshifularo, Head of Dialdirect, “These incidents could be significantly reduced, if not avoided altogether, by putting smart measures in place.” 


Tips to protect your vehicle and valuables: 

- Ensure that your vehicle is parked in a well-lit, protected and ideally guarded area.- Be especially mindful of remote jamming. Check that your vehicle is locked and then, check again.- Be wary of “sliders” – criminals who seem to be passers-by, who open one of your vehicles doors just a bit before you get the chance to -    lock your vehicle and then loot the vehicle once you’re gone.- Avoid leaving valuables in your vehicle and, if you have to leave them behind, make sure that they are stored out of sight.- Don’t use your car as a cupboard. Empty out your car at the end of each day to keep the temptation of criminals at an absolute minimum.- Equip your car’s windows with anti-smash-and-grab film, which offers an extra layer of protection.- If your vehicle does not come with a good alarm system, invest in one that sounds the moment that there is any sort of breach.- Never leave items of interest lying in full view on car seats while driving or when leaving your car parked.- Never leave house keys or important papers in your car.- Ensure that you have adequate insurance cover on portable possessions you carry with you on a regular basis. 

“It’s also very handy to have Namola, the safety app, supported by Dialdirect, on your smartphone. Namola is the simplest way for South Africans to get help fast in an emergency." said Tshifularo.