Durban - Staff and students at the University of KwaZulu-Natal have praised outgoing vice-chancellor Dr Albert van Jaarsveld for restoring confidence in the institution.
UKZN’s chair of council, Reverend Vukile Mehana, said the announcement of Van Jaarsveld’s resignation, 18 months before the end of his five-year term, was made with “deep regret and sadness”.

The university announced on Wednesday that Van Jaarsveld would leave at the end of September to take up a post as director-general and chief executive of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, based in Austria. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

According to its website, the institute conducts policy-oriented research into problems of a global nature that are too large or too complex to be solved by a single country or academic discipline.

Sandile Zondi, UKZN central SRC president, said he was pleased that Van Jaarsveld, a South African academic, had been chosen to lead a global institution. 

“We worked well with the VC, he had an open-door policy - literally - and he communicated well with us and listened to our contributions,” said Zondi.

“We are sad to see him go but as students and future professionals we understand that when opportunities arise it is part of a person’s development that one chapter must be closed for a better one.”

Van Jaarsveld said his resignation was bitter-sweet. Having prided himself on building good relationships with stakeholders, he said “marvellous things” had been achieved and he was excited about the university’s future.

“We worked with council to establish a new strategic thrust and there has already been significant progress. We are on a much better path. I believe there is good leadership to take it forward and continue on the same course,” he said. 

While UKZN’s reputation had suffered blows with allegations of fraud and corruption, Van Jaarsveld said this was not indicative of the culture at the institution. “That is not aligned with 
the values of this institution. Immediately after we were made aware, we instituted a forensic investigation, made the necessary suspensions and we are in the 
final phase of concluding that report.”

He said his proudest achievement was restoring confidence and dignity at UKZN. 

Van Jaarsveld, who will be moving to Austria with his wife, said he was looking forward to his new post. 

“I think my entire academic career and the research I have been involved with historically, positioned me where I wouldn’t not take the job where I can contribute to improving people’s lives globally.”

He said he could not let the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to work at the institute pass him by.
The Mercury