Durban - An estimated 20 000 runners will gather for the annual Comrades Marathon on Sunday, June 10. In the early hours of the morning outside the Pietermaritzburg City Hall, runners will be jostling, stretching and warming up ahead of the 89km Comrades Marathon ‘down run’ to Durban. Main sponsor, Bonitas Medical Fund, will be showing additional support at the start line in the form of providing start up vests for every runner.

“This one size fits all vest, is designed for comfort and warmth during the pre-run preparation before the start gun fires as 5:30am. The supply of these warm up vests forms part of the ongoing Comrades Marathon tradition of community upliftment and social investment. The Pietermaritzburg Mental Health Society (PMB MHS), one of the 48 Community Chest Impact Partners, was commissioned to produce 20 000 warm up vests,” said Operations Manager of Community Chest Pietermaritzburg, Liza Dickson.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

They are one of the six Amabeadibeadi charities supported by the Comrades Marathon.

Dickson said the contract created employment opportunities and upskilling for around 40 people.

“We are thrilled at the positive impact of this particular job creation project.  It not only provided the Mental Health Society with much needed income but also taught new skills to those who were called upon to cut, trim and sew the vests. In fact we utilised a workforce from three protective workshops, Buxton, MH Moosa and Inkahyezito. Everyone is very proud at the achievement and cannot wait for their product to be worn on June 10,”she said. 

The vest is made from soft, non-irritating, recycled plastic polymer (spund bond) fabric, which has excellent thermal properties. They are disposable and environmentally friendly and although many runners may discard these vests along the route, the clean-up team will retrieve them during the sweep and donate them back to the Community Chest who re-distribute to a project in need. 

Principal Officer of Bonitas, Gerhard van Emmenis, said their partnership with the Comrades Marathon has been a long one.

“We are pleased to have been part of this incredible journey with so many athletes and supporters over the past ten years. For us it goes beyond branding and logo rights.  It’s about sharing the passion of the race, celebrating the determination of the runners, being part of a legacy that supports true grit and perseverance n and being able to give back to charity.  It’s a wonderful winning combination,” an Emmenis said. 

“This year’s theme is ‘Asijki – no turning back,’ so we will be with the field every step of the way.  It began by hosting interactive training seminars around the country and continues with keeping runners warm on the start line and finally cheering them over the finish line before the 17h30 gun,” van Emmenis said. 

He said in addition to this, Bonitas is also celebrating the positive impact people with disabilities have in society.  

“We are thrilled that the commissioning of our vests provided employment for 40 individuals over a two month period, bringing with it some financial security and a sense of achievement and pride in being part of this incredible race that is about camaraderie and tenacity,” he said. 

The Mercury