Durban - While Eskom and the three unions representing its workers have pledged to go back to the negotiation table, load shedding is set to continue with the power utility saying yesterday it could take about 10 days to fully recover from the effects of the strike.
The power utility said there was a “shortage of capacity” due to the effects of last week’s strike and this will remain so in the coming week.

Read: #Loadshedding - Eskom warns of continued power outages

“The power system remains constrained, despite several units being returned to service on Sunday morning. Risk for load shedding during the course of  this week remained high,” it said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Eskom said its recovery teams at power stations were working hard to stabilise the power system.

On Thursday last week scores of Eskom workers downed tools demanding a salary increase. Eskom had told the workers that there would be no salary increase this year due to financial constraints. This angered the unions resulting in some of the workers embarking on a strike.

Last week Eskom referred to the strike as illegal industrial action, saying it was characterised by “acts of sabotage and intimidation”.

It said there had been attacks on staff, road blockages and damage to electricity infrastructure. As a result coal deliveries had to be stopped due to security considerations.

The Hendrina, Camden, Kendal, and Arnot power stations were the worst affected.

To prevent a total blackout, Eskom started implementing load shedding on Friday.

However, the unions denied any sabotage and intimidation, accusing Eskom of dishonesty.

Numsa spokesperson Phakamile Hlubi denied that there was ever any strike by the union.

“We were never on strike. We called for a national day of picketing on Thursday,” she said after being asked if the strike had been called off or not.

On Friday, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan met the unions representing disgruntled Eskom workers.

The three unions, Numsa, Solidarity and NUM, agreed to start talks with Eskom management starting on Monday.

The parties agreed that the 0% increase proposed by Eskom was “off the table” and also agreed to normalise the situation and give the negotiations a chance.

“Numsa views the process of engagement as necessary in resolving the dispute between us and Eskom management in laying the ground for the negotiations to continue.

“We are ready to engage meaningfully with Eskom in our demands as has been our attitude from the beginning of the negotiations,” Numsa general secretary Irvin Jim said.

Gordhan called on all parties to play their part in ensuring that electricity supply is restored.



The Mercury