Durban - It was a good night for newcomer Shekhinah at the 24th edition of SA Music Awards (SAMA) held in Sun City, North West on Saturday night. 

Shekhinah swept the boards taking the Newcomer of the Year, Album of the Year and Female Artist of the Year awards for the sterling work on her debut album Rose Gold.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Distruction Boyz whipped the Superbowl into a frenzy when they were declared winners of the public-voted Record of the Year for their monster hit Omunye.

Veteran Afro Pop band, Mafikizolo proved their staying power when they took Duo/Group of the Year and Best Afro Pop Album. Add to their Best Engineered Album (by Howard Gomba and Themba Sekowe) win from last night, Mafikizolo is tied at three awards with Shekhinah overall.

Joyous Celebration’s Joyous Celebration Volume 21 Heal Our Land won the Best Selling Digital Artist Award, adding to the two Best Selling DVD and Best Selling Album they won last night brings their haul to three in total.

The anthemic Akanamali by Sun-El Musician featuring Samthing Soweto was honoured with Sampra Highest Airplay of the Year and Samro Highest Airplay of the Year Composer’s Award, last night they won Best Collaboration Award taking their total to three.

House DJ Prince Kaybee took home Male Artist of the Year for his hits laden album I Am Music.

New blood made their presence felt with rapper Shane Eagle taking the Best Hip Hop Album Award and Lady Zamar winning Best Dance Music Award. In the Best Kwaito Album category, Busiswa beat the competition for her album Highly Flavoured. Tresor’s The Beautiful Madness earned him the Best Pop Album.

In gospel, Andile ka Majola was declared the winner in the Best Traditional Faith Music Album category for Andile kaMajola Chapter 8 Sekwanele while Vuma Zion’s Samson Aphi Amandla Akho bagged the Best African Indigenous Gospel Album.

Jo Black’s Skepe emerged victorious in the Beste Kontemporere Musiek Album category and Fokofpolisiekar’s Selfmedikasie was announced the Best Rock Album.

The glittering high octave celebrity event hosted by TV and radio stars Somizi Mhlongo and Dineo Ranaka; and comedian Mpho Popps was broadcast live on SABC1 and featured performances by Distruction Boyz, Lady Zamar, Shwi noMtekhala, Shekhinah, Die Heuwels Fantasties, Bongeziwe Mabandla and Riky Rick.

President Cyril Ramaphosa and Nathi Mthethwa, Minister of Arts and Culture were among the dignitaries that graced the night.

RiSA CEO, Nhanhla Sibisi, said the event had been a remarkable night of celebrating the best SA has to offer. 

"We salute all the winners and the nominees and we thank the public for their undying support for local music. We applaud everyone who made SAMA24 such a successful project," Sibisi said. 

Complete list of winners

Best Selling Digital Artist of the Year – Joyous Celebration Volume 21 Heal Our Land by Joyous Celebration

Sampra Highest Airplay of the Year – Akanamali by Sun El Musician featuring Samthing Soweto

Best Traditional Faith Music Album – Andile kaMajola Chapter 8 Sekwanele by Andile kaMajola

Best African Indigenous Gospel Album – Samson Aphi Amandla Akho by Vuma Zion

Best Kwaito Album – Highly Flavoured by Busiswa

Best Afro Pop Album – 20 by Mafikizolo

Beste Kontemporere Musiek Album – Skepe by Jo Black

Best Pop Album – The Beautiful Madness by Tresor

Samro Highest Airplay of the Year Composer’s Award – Akanamali by Sun El Musician featuring Samthing Soweto composed by Sanele T Sithole

International Achievement Award – Shashika Mooruth

Best Rock Album – Selfmedikasie by Fokofpolisiekar

Best Hip Hop Album – Yellow by Shane Eagle

Best Dance Album – King Zamar by Lady Zamar

Best Maskandi Album – 6 to 6 by Abafana Baka Mgqumeni

Newcomer of the Year – Rose Gold by Shekhinah

Duo or Group of the Year – 20 by Mafikizolo 

Female Artist of the Year – Rose Gold by Shekhinah

Male Artist of the Year – I Am Music by Prince Kaybee

Album of the Year – Rose Gold by Shekhinah

Record of the Year – Omunye by Distruction Boyz