Durban - When Gilly Walters made the first batch of nougat for a dinner party and music concert she was hosting in her Birnam Wood home in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands, she could never have guessed her venture would lead to the establishment of a small business that has become a household brand.
Her first effort at making nougat was a runny disaster, but she was determined to perfect the recipe.

And before she knew it, she had the knack and the nougat became a hit with guests at the regular music concerts with pianist Christopher Duigan.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She then started selling her homemade nougat at the Pieter-
maritzburg Farmers Market and the business outgrew the kitchen and moved into the garage.

The brand Wedgewood Crafted Confectionery was born, and the business eventually moved into a newly built factory on a farm in Birnamwood.

Today, the thriving family business employs 73 permanent staff and distributes hundreds of tons of its nougat products nationally and internationally.

Paul Walters, one of Gilly’s three sons who joined the business in 2006, said it was a challenge managing growth while maintaining the quality of the nougat.

Gilly started the business in 1999 after she and her husband, Taffy, met Duigan at the farmers market where they were selling cheeses and homemade bread.

“My mom said she needed some good music in her life and asked Chris to start some soirées in her home at Howick. He did one or two and it started to grow,” Paul said.

Taffy built a new, acoustically designed home which could seat 50 people for dinner or 100 people for tea.

“Chris ended up doing about 150 concerts at their house and my mom made meals and at one of the meals she made nougat and it was a dreadful failure. It was running all over. Being a passionate cook, she thought she would get it right and it took her six months to perfect the recipe and it’s the same recipe we are using now,” Paul said.

“She would cook it in the kitchen in an old Kenwood mixer and take it down to the farmers market and it grew by word of mouth. It was a handmade project by my mom, dad and Thembi, who worked with us as a domestic worker. My dad would be up at 10pm at night cutting nougat with a big knife,” Paul said.

Gilly also started the Angel biscuits brand to use up factory products, such as egg yolk and nougat offcuts, that would otherwise be wasted.

Paul’s older brothers, John and Steve, who has since left the business, joined in 2001 after closing their flour mill business.

“We worked well as a family and it grew from the garage to my dad’s workshop. My brothers had a vision to move the factory on to the farm, where it could be a sustainable lifestyle where the family could live and the factory could be the heartbeat.” 

Paul said his parents eventually handed the business to him and his brothers and today he runs it, together with John and a third partner, Ryan Hooker.

“We started building the brand through independent retailers and getting into more formal retailers in 2006 and we started a bit of exporting,” Paul said.

The business now exports about 20% of production - under the Walters brand because of a trademark conflict with a British business that exports biscuits - to 12 countries including the UK, Germany, Sweden, Denmark and the Middle East. 

The business produces about 1800kg of handmade nougat - made with locally sourced natural honey, butter, glucose, flour and nuts - every day. The products are supplied to retailers nationwide and also sold at its on-site factory shop.

The company’s brand manager, Kate Frost, saw a gap in the sports nutrition market for a food supplement made of natural ingredients. 

Sportsmen and women were already consuming the nougat, so Frost decided to come up with a niche product to meet their sporting demands and another local brand, Racefood, was born.

Frost, an avid sportswoman, who was in the South African team that competed in the World White Water Championships in the Czech Republic, South America and South Korea, developed the recipe for the sports bar.

“My passion was sport and I got very sick with heart complications and couldn’t do sport any more, so turned my focus to sport nutrition,” she said.

“A lot of athletes were looking for natural alternatives to what was already on the market and being part of the Wedgewood brand, we were racing on the nougat and getting everything we needed. 

“That’s when I decided to create a sport nutrition product with egg white/honey as the base.” Frost wanted to create a natural product made of “real food” that would taste great and help athletes optimise their performance. She conducted market research among athletes who tested the products and spent a year and a half developing a recipe using only natural ingredients, such as egg white, nuts, fruit and honey.

“By eating real food, you are not going to have a sugar spike or tummy issues and cramping because your body is getting all it needs from the food. 

“It’s easy to eat, easy to carry and it tastes good,” Frost said.

Multiple Dusi winner Martin Dreyer was also instrumental in helping her to establish the brand. 

Racefood was introduced to the market in 2012 and three years later it became one of the official sponsors to the Comrades Marathon.

“We started with a couple of boxes and are now producing on average about three tons a month, which equates to 120000 bars a month,” Frost said.

The product is distributed throughout the country to retailers including, Dischem, Sportsman’s Warehouse, Cape Union Mart, Spar and independent retailers.

Paul and Frost both see huge potential to grow the Racefood brand and introduce new products, some of which are already under development. And they have plans to develop a savoury snack.

“We would love to get into health snacking in a bigger way. We love the sport nutrition healthy snacking angle and have some exciting projects at the moment, such as a real food protein bar,” Paul said.
The Mercury