Durban - Tertiary institutions in Durban have welcomed the idea of a demarcated accommodation precinct as it would help provide lodging for thousands of students who apply for residence every year.
This was in reaction to eThekwini Municipality’s proposal to demarcate areas within a specific radius of the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Howard College and Westville campuses where accommodation would be allowed and possibly incentivised by the city.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Read: Residents reject student village

The municipality currently does not have a policy to guide where students are accommodated nor any way to plan for or manage establishments and curb the infiltration of students in residential areas.

UKZN spokesperson Norman Zondo said it was aware of the city’s proposal. The university said it was already using private establishments to accommodate their students.

In Manor Gardens, within which the proposed precinct falls, UKZN had about 150 students living in private accommodation vetted by the university, she said.

At campus residences, UKZN accommodates 6800 students at Edgewood, Howard College, Medical School, Westville and Pietermaritzburg. The off-campus residences accommodate 12 200 student.

Zondo said the university was, in the meantime, continually identifying suitable accommodation for students.

The project is far from being finalised and is currently at a study stage.

Leading the study is Professor Michael Kahn, a town planner associated with Zimanga Urban and Rural Design which was contracted by the municipality in May last year.

Kahn is assisted by Deepak Rampaul and a project team from Zimanga. In a joint statement, Kahn and Rampaul said the precinct around UKZN was a pilot project to test the efficacy of this approach.

“If it achieves its intentions, this approach will be extended to all the areas around other tertiary institution campuses after a similar careful analysis of these areas,” they said.

According to Durban University of Technology’s senior residential affairs officer Phumlani Mnyango, it accommodates almost 2500 students in its residences and about the same number at private accommodation, which the university leases.

“DUT and its students would benefit from having a demarcated and secure accommodation precinct for students, which is within close proximity to the university campuses,” said Mnyango.

According to Kahn and Rampaul, security is one of the objectives of the proposal.

“The approach is to assess and create appropriate approaches for the provision of student accommodation that provide safe and accessible housing for students, a home away from home atmosphere, areas that have good public transport, areas that have access to a range of facilities that students would need - laundrettes, retail facilities, restaurants, social and recreational facilities - and without a doubt, access to the rest of the world via world-class digital technology.”

Mangosuthu University of Technology also supported the proposal and said a precinct within 5km of it that provided the relevant amenities would be suitable, said spokesperson Bheki Hlophe.

On campus, the university accommodates 1320 students while almost 6000 lived at the 19 leased residences.

MUT said about 1000 students who applied could not be accommodated.
The Mercury