Durban - Things are looking up for cancer services in KwaZulu-Natal, with the process to regain accreditation to train specialists having started with the recruitment of a head of oncology.
Professor Ncoza Dlova, the dean and head of University of KwaZulu-Natal’s School of Clinical Medicine, said after about a year without a head of oncology, the position was finally advertised last week. “We are aggressively headhunting. We have one or two interested applicants thus far and hoping to fill this post soon,” she said. 

The university’s oncology department has also appointed a newly qualified oncologist who is now also working at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital  (IALCH). The hospital is also expecting a head of clinical unit to start next month.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The university lost its Health Professions Council of South Africa accreditation to train oncologists with the resignation of an academic head and others, leaving no one to train registrars. 

Oncologists and other specialists had left en masse, crippling the public health services in the province. However, Dlova says this is a nationwide problem. 

“There is a strong pull for our newly qualified specialists to go into private practice. Oncology is in crisis all over South Africa, it’s a highly lucrative area of specialisation as there is a high prevalence and incidence of cancer,” she said. 

Dlova said the university had filled seven other head of department posts in the health sciences.  

“The current leadership of the medical school is so innovative and supportive. They are embracing and there is such a team spirit, you can’t help but be inspired by such greatness. You want to join this team that’s dedicated to empowerment and change in South Africa. 

“There is also a sense of changing the narrative and making education and medi
cine more accessible,” she said. 

These appointments do not only mean academic and teaching staff for the university, but clinical and training staff for public hospitals. “The academic hospitals (Addington, IALCH, and Grey’s) still have oncology departments, which have medical officers. Grey’s Hospital has a fully functioning oncology department which is training oncology registrars,” she said. 

Priscilla Sekhonyana, a spokesperson for the  Health Professions Council of SA  (HPCSA), said Grey’s was approved to train registrars for four years. “However, the council will still visit the institution for approval of a full training in July. There are three oncologist training registrars,” she said. 

“These medical officers in oncology training diagnose and manage patients. The current officers are in a process of being trained to take up registrar posts and once accreditation is regained, they will become full-time registrars, said Dlova. 

The next round of accreditation assessment is in August next year. “The responsibility of a university and the education and training of a doctor is not a once-off procedure. 

“Continuous education and training are a lifelong experience for all doctors. We need to be on top of our game and keep up with the latest cutting-edge research and technology,” said Dlova. 

Department of Health head Dr Musa Gumede said they would support the UKZN’s 
recruitment process.  
The Mercury