Durban - Drunk driver Stephan Bothma, who pleaded guilty to driving drunk, which led to a crash in which two sisters were severely injured, will know his fate on Monday. 
Bothma is expected to be sentenced in the Durban Magistrate’s Court.

In the incident last June, a couple, Hamresin and Taariqa Archary, along with Taariqa’s sister Varsha Maharaj, were waiting at a red traffic light when Bothma, a personal trainer from Hillcrest, ploughed into the vehicle they were in.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Taariqa, who two weeks before had travelled to London to celebrate her 30th birthday, was left permanently paralysed.

Varsha suffered brain injuries, while Hamresin was not injured.

Hamresin told The Mercury that Taariqa, who was cut out of the wreckage with the Jaws of Life, was classified as a C5-C6 quadriplegic, which means she has paralysis in all four of 
her limbs and requires maximum assistance for almost all tasks. 

“Her elbows and wrists can be pulled in, but not extended on her own. 

“Her hands are completely paralysed, and she is paralysed from about the high chest going down,” he said. Caro Smit, the founder of South Africans Against Drunk Drivers, is calling for Bothma to get five years in jail per severe injury, as allowed by the Road Traffic Act, and for the sentences to run consecutively.

“If Bothma serves 10 years in jail, he will come out of jail still being able to walk and work. Taariqa will never be able to walk or work properly again. 

“She was given a life sentence of paralysis, emotional and physical pain and huge expenses for herself and the whole family,” said Smit.

Last week, Taariqa testified in court asking Durban Magistrate Phumlani Bhengu for retribution as a victim whose future had been taken away.

This was in response to Bothma’s request for leniency as he is a first offender.

Hamresin Archary said their lives had been completely altered, with Taariqa needing a caregiver and daily therapy.

“I get home just as her caregiver leaves, and then I have to handle all transfers and dressing for bed. We have help from our moms, who take turns to stay with us. 

“They have been cooking and driving Taariqa to the various therapies. The weekends are even more difficult as we don’t have the assistance of a caregiver,” he said. 

Taariqa and Hamresin were hoping to start a family before the accident, but now all they hope is that their “message can change the habits of South Africans”.

“We understand that no sentence will give back what was taken from us, but a strong message from the courts may be the deterrent that will save another from the same fate,” Hamresin said.

Varsha, has made a phenomenal recovery after suffering severe head trauma during the accident. 

However, she still suffers from severe headaches, both physical and mental fatigue, and her short-term memory is very poor.
The Mercury