Durban - KwaZulu-Natal is to get a share in R100million to deal with the oncology backlog which, according to the Department of Health, equates to 500 patients.
This was announced by Health Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi in Pretoria on Tuesday to address “allegations” of the collapse of the country’s public health system.

He admitted the system was “very distressed and going through very hard times”, but denied it was collapsing. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This was in response to alleged comments made by Health Ombud Malegapuru Makgoba. 

In an eNCA interview last week, Makgoba mentioned the KZN oncology crisis and the large number of complaints he received. He said this week he would be investigating a “potential Life Esidimeni” in the Eastern Cape.

It’s not clear how many people have died while waiting for treatment in KZN. 
WATCH: 'Steve Biko oncology ward not on the verge of collapse'

In his report to the provincial executive council last week, KZN Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said 3017 radiotherapy patients were registered for future appointments, of which only about 500 were new. 

The province has been in the spotlight following the SA Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) finding that cancer patients’ rights had been violated by the department’s failure to provide them with access to treatment. 

Motsoaledi conceded the crisis was “quite bad”. “We don’t like what KZN has done. I carried the brunt by virtue of being a minister, because of procurement and human resource issues that happened in KZN. But we are trying to help them. 

“We have even bought them new oncology equipment (which is) busy being tested. We have even helped to repair the previous one The issues that led to that oncology problem is something that is unacceptable, it was very disappointing,” he said.

As to who should be held accountable, Motsoaledi said he left that matter to the SAHRC. 

Motsoaledi said the oncology and other crises in KZN and other provinces stemmed largely from a lack of adequate human resources, procurement and financial management issues as well as the lack of proper maintenance of equipment.  

He said these were purely provincial and not national competencies. “We need a system that will stop that, and that is what the NHI (National Health Insurance) will do.”

He added that based on the NHI model, the KZN spearheaded private-public partnership between the provincial health department and the Wits Health Consortium and Joint Medical Holdings would be adopted in Gauteng. 

The R100m is to help KZN and Gauteng as part of a campaign against cancer which will be launched in August. “When we announce the campaign against cancer we will show you what we are doing to deal with the shortage of doctors (in the public sector). A large number are in the private sector, so in those programmes we are going to contract private doctors to make sure patients have access to both.

“For instance, in this HIV campaign we are going to launch we are going to send 50 000 patients to private practitioners and say please take care of these patients, the state will give you the medication but when they are sick - in terms of HIV - they are yours, we will pay you,” he said. 

Motsoaledi said once the machines at Addington Hospital were running, more healthcare professionals would be recruited. He said the department had tried to recruit two oncologists from India, but the salaries they wanted were too high. He said this did not go ahead as it would not have been fair on equally qualified South African specialists. 
The Mercury