Durban - A lobby group that supports former president Jacob Zuma has confirmed it is likely to form a political party after holding an imbizo next month.
This comes after nationwide consultations with amakhosi, members of the taxi industry, religious leaders, veterans, Zuma and unemployed youth formations.

Mazibuyele Emasisweni’s organiser, Reggie Ngcobo, said the response on the ground was clear that there was a need for a new political party.

“So far, through our consultations, we are leaning more towards a political party than a civil society organisation because the reality of our black electorate is that they believe their day to day problems can be solved through political power,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The group’s leadership also believes Zuma was humiliated by the ANC and that the party has a “gross deficit of leadership” without him.

However, Zuma has dismissed reports that Mazibuyele Emasisweni was lobbying him to join them, as they were aggrieved by his recall. 

Zuma’s son Edward has also distanced his father from the organisation, saying that his father would never leave the ANC.

“We will obviously take advantage of the ANC internal squabbles but we are not planning to base our strategy on that,” said Ngcobo.

“We can’t come with the mentality that the ANC is in ICU and we will just collect votes. The fall of the ANC could be an advantage but not what we will be pinning our hopes on.” 

Ngcobo said there were many South Africans who were eligible to vote who felt despondent and had expressed a need for a new political home.

The group believes the ANC under President Cyril Ramaphosa will not implement the more radical resolutions, such as land expropriation without compensation, adopted at the party’s national congress in December. 

They are advocating for the establishment of a fourth arm of state, Indlu YaMakhosi, expropriation of land without compensation and subsidies for black-owned industries.

“The issue of traditional leaders being part of the arms of state, having legislative powers and working in cohesion with municipalities, is crucial in developing rural communities,” Ngcobo said. 
The Mercury