Durban - South Africans needed to unite and throw off the straitjacket of division imposed on the nation by apartheid, which led to voting along racial and historical lines, DA leader Mmusi Maimane said in Durban on Wednesday.
Maimane was addressing delegates during the second day of the SA Property Owners Association’s Annual Convention and Property Exhibition.

“If we want to succeed in this multi-ethnic democracy, then we are going to have to move away from the politics of identity. We will need a political system in which people express their hopes and ideals rather than their race. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“And to do this we will have to start focusing on the things that unite us rather than that which ­divides us,” Maimane said.

He said the only way to solve the country’s problems was for citizens to unite.

“Right now there are many who want to take us back to a place we must never return to. They want to divide us by race once more. They want us to mistrust each other, blame each other, target each other,” Maimane said.

“They do this not because they genuinely believe we should hate one another, but because it is their strategy to retain power.”

Maimane said creating jobs for the unemployed was crucial if the country wanted to achieve reconciliation and establish itself in its rightful place in the world. 

“Any talk of resurrecting our rainbow nation has to be backed up by a solid, workable plan to meet our biggest challenge head-on. And that challenge is the economic exclusion of millions and millions of our people,” Maimane said.

He said people were “running out of hope” and needed to see a change in their prospects.

“We must also urgently reduce the size of our massively bloated administration, and also our ballooning public-sector wage bill. 

“We must dramatically reduce irregular and wasteful expenditure, and we must come down hard on corruption. Zero tolerance for waste and zero tolerance for theft is the only way forward,” Maimane said.
The Mercury