South Africans started the weekend dreading more load shedding as Eskom and its striking workers circled each other, but a flicker of hope emerged late last night.
In the second bout of shedding on Friday, the power utility announced cut-offs from noon, which hit areas of Durban, but these ended at 7.16pm.

Eskom did warn last night, however, that the restoration of power may take longer in some areas.

Thursday and Friday’s announcements of Stage 1 load shedding came amid a fierce battle at Eskom, with businesses and citizens’ lives being plunged into darkness as rostered blackouts once again became a grim reality.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

But last night Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan announced that talks between Eskom and its employees were back on after he called them in for a meeting.

“The parties agreed that the current disruptions at Eskom which resulted in load shedding since (Thursday) are not beneficial to either party, nor the country and the economy,” Gordhan said.

Normalise

They had agreed to resume negotiations immediately and had also agreed that the 0% pay offer from Eskom was off the table.

Gordhan said Eskom, Num, Numsa and Solidarity had also agreed to normalise operations immediately and restore the production of the electricity supply.

On Friday, eThekwini metro council spokesperson Mandla Nsele confirmed that load shedding had already affected several areas.

He said there was a load-shedding schedule available for customers on the council’s website and the council would be utilising it at any given moment should Eskom activate cut-offs.

Last night, the country’s power generator issued a statement saying: “Eskom is working with all the relevant stakeholders to keep its plant operating optimally, however there is a high risk of load shedding over the weekend.”

Energy experts have condemned Eskom’s handling of the ongoing labour dispute which has led to power outages, allegedly because of the utility’s striking employees interfering with operations.

Eskom blamed load shedding on “current illegal protest action” by some employees at various sites over wage increases.

Unions and Eskom management are at loggerheads over a workers’ demand for a 15% increase, and one expert insisted the dispute was holding the country to ransom.

“This threatens the livelihood of every single person living in the country,” said independent energy expert Chris Yelland. “If Eskom fails, we all fail.”

The parastatal’s troubles were reignited this week as disgruntled workers from NUM Numsa and Solidarity downed tools and threatened a national shutdown if their salary hike demand was not met.

Eskom management has consistently argued it simply does not have the funds to meet these demands.

On Thursday, the Labour Court granted Eskom an interdict against striking unions.

The court ordered against any further planned strikes pickets gatherings or marches by NUM Numsa and Solidarity.

Irate residents took to the eThekwini’s Facebook page to express their anger over the return of load-shedding.

This after some had apparently been without power for nearly six hours, without notice from the municipality.

Susannah Knowles, commenting on the municipality’s post on Facebook regarding the schedule, said she had no electricity for six hours.

Sabotage

Ajith Seosunker said “the CEO of Eskom said just yesterday on national TV there is no planned load shedding and that Thursday’s load shedding was an act of sabotage.

“Please get your house in order and arrest those rogue elements within the municipality as thousands of paying residents will not take kindly to this.”

Other residents were concerned about missing out on the sports this weekend as there are four Fifa World Cup matches today and another four tomorrow, as well as the rugby Test between the Springboks and England today.

Energy consultant Ted Blom blamed Eskom for leaving South Africans without electricity, insisting it had been standing “too close to the edge for too long”.

“Eskom’s fall was inevitable,” he said.

Blom said there had been issues with the utility’s labour, coal and plant management for years and it had consistently pushed each of these elements to the limits.

He blamed the management team for Eskom’s woes.

Numsa has applauded their members for their united stance on the issue.

Mismanagement

The union’s national spokesperson, Phakamile Hlubi-Majola, said Eskom cited financial constraints as its reason for not being able to grant workers a salary increase, but it was because of state capture at the parastatal as well as mismanagement.

“We made a clarion call that mines should be supplying Eskom with cheap and good quality coal instead of enriching capitalists who run Eskom mines, and who used these mines before the global commodity crisis in 2008, to maximise profits for themselves out of Eskom coal contracts,” said Hlubi-Majola.

She said Eskom executives who allowed the exorbitant coal cost increases of 17% year-on-year, paid themselves huge bonuses while workers continued to suffer.

“This very same picture we are painting here was used to motivate why Eskom workers should not get an increase or inflationary-related increases only.”

Last night, KwaZulu-Natal regional organiser at Numsa, Henry Myende, said they had managed to persuade all their members to return to work late, but added he couldn’t comment on whether wage negotiations would continue on Monday.