Durban - Transport and Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda has urged people in Mtubatuba, who had burnt and looted trucks during service delivery protests, to stop or they will have to face the law.
Kaunda and MEC for Human Settlements and Public Works Ravi Pillay met the community at the Mfekayi Community Hall on Thursday.

The residents went on the rampage last week, burnt trucks and blocked the N2 demanding housing, a police station and a clinic. Among other demands raised during the meeting were the upgrading of access roads, electricity, toilets and access to water.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Kaunda said the police management in the cluster had developed a plan to ensure that police deployments are increased in the area as there is no proper police station. 

He urged members of the community to desist from embarking on illegal, violent protests and blocking roads and to rather use proper channels to raise their grievances. 

“Anyone who wants to organise a protest march must obtain a permit from the local authorities and without this permit, police must act and arrest illegal protesters,” said Kaunda.

Pillay said the procurement process to build houses for families in the area was under way. He said he would ensure that construction companies that were appointed would build quality houses.

“The department will also monitor this process for the next 30 days and if there are challenges, we will intervene directly.” 

Kaunda’s spokesperson, Kwanele Ncalane, said that the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs had reported that the electrification programme has started with 500 houses in the area. 

He also said a budget had been allocated for the building of access roads, which were the responsibility of municipalities. He added that plans were in place and that construction would commence from July 1. 

Kaunda said the district municipality reported that the water supply in the area has been hampered by drought which affected the entire province. Apart from this, water reservoirs had broken pumps which the municipality has begun to address.  

“Regarding the building of a clinic, while plans are being finalised to build a clinic, the Department of Health will increase the number of mobile clinics which will visit all affected areas on a weekly basis,” he said. 

The department would also set up a committee to ensure that the mobile clinics were distributed and were operating effectively in the area. 
The Mercury