Durban - Support, family and sticking to the coach’s plan are among the top reasons for the victory of this year’s Comrade Marathon title holders Bong’musa Mthembu and Ann Ashworth.
“I will celebrate when I retire I didn’t even know my family were here - my brother and my sister were here I am happy about my victory,” said three-time Comrades Marathon winner Mthembu.

He said the victory was a special one for him as he had doubted he would finish the race due to circumstances that arose during his training.

“It was not an injury but it disrupted my training. Because of this situation, there were times when I couldn’t train”.

Speaking about the race, Mthembu said that overall he thought it went well.

“I’m happy that I resisted the racers’ fast pace till I reached Pinetown, because that is where I saw it was the right time to make my move.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mthembu said it was emotional crossing the finish line because he went through a lot this season.

Unlike him, his older brother, Thulebone Mthembu, said he was more than comfortable that his brother, who was once a soccer player, would bag the win again. “He was a very good soccer player growing up and we played for different teams in school. So when he decided that he was going to branch off from a team and run alone, I knew and had faith he would excel at that as well,” said Thulebone.

Mthembu had not seen his family in two months because of his training and it was a pleasant surprise for him when he crossed the finish line and heard that his family were there.

“We are happy as a family. In fact I think the whole of KZN is happy that my brother won again. During his preparation for the race he would occasionally drop in at my place and ask for food when he was there, but you know how these athletes are all they eat is non-fatty food so that was tricky for me,” joked Thulebone.

Ashworth, who is an advocate, crossed the finish line at 6:10:04, ensuring that the title of Comrades Marathon Women’s Champion 2018 stayed in South Africa.

“It’s taken a lot from me and my family we have made big sacrifices. 

“I ran this race for my mom. She’s over the moon right now, she’s been seconding me along the side of the road since I was 12 years old. She is my chief second and my biggest fan I would do anything for my mom.”

Ashworth said that while she was thrilled at the win, no one was more surprised at the victory than her.

“My motto for this year’s race was ‘God made me for a purpose and you should fill his pleasure’ - I wanted to make sure that the title stayed in SA. I followed the plan we set with my coach; it was an interesting race. 

“There was a lot of hot pace upfront and I didn’t want to get sucked into it, so I just ran my own race,” she said.

She said training for the race was tough especially since she hadn’t been at work for the past two months.

It was also an emotional end for runners who pulled and carried each other across the finish to make it before the race’s cut-off time.

“It’s hard, this race, but I also feel fantastic having completed it, I feel like I can do anything now,” said Australian Karen Tuporious, who was in tears.

While some runners collapsed at the finish, grateful to have made it, Miniyokulinda Luthuli walked across the finish line unfazed.

“Look my aim was to make the 11 hour mark and I made it with 15 minutes to spare. I had a good race from the beginning with no pain. It wasn’t my best time personally but I can’t complain since I did not get time to train this time around,” Luthuli said.

Andre Venter from Pretoria ran his first Comrades this year and was one of the last people to make it through before the cut-off.

“I’m very excited and very exhausted at the same time. This was my first and last run; I’m too old for this,” said the 52-year-old.

Venter explained that he only ran because his daughter was running with him and added that he experienced the Comrades “spirit” along the route.

“It was my neighbour who found me on the road, she took my hand and pushed me tremendously, it was her and her husband they got me through the race and they have been doing it for ten years now”.
The Mercury