Durban - The MEC for Economic ­Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Sihle Zikalala, says exploring all the opportunities in the oceans economy would help to alleviate youth unemployment.
The oceans economy, he said, was increasingly being termed the new frontier of development and economic growth, adding it also had the potential to create business opportunities for young people.

Zikalala was speaking at the Youth Day commemoration event held at the Moses Mabhida Stadium on Sunday.

He said a 200-megawatt power plant worth R45billion, to be built in Richards Bay, would have a “major economic impact and would create employment opportunities during construction and in the general economic value-chain”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“KwaZulu-Natal has developed its own Provincial Maritime Industry Strategy, which is vital to broadening public and business awareness about the opportunities that can be explored in this sector. 

“The strategy reflects a combination of sectors and subsectors such as aquaculture, transport logistics, tourism, freight, aqua-sports, ship and boat building and repairs,  as well as marine energy,” Zikalala told the thousands of young people who attended the event.

He said his department had started training young people, and that the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board had been transformed into a centre of excellence in the maritime field, with youngsters being recruited to acquire practical skills in maritime-related disciplines like sailing and boat building and repairs. 

Also speaking at the event, eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede emphasised the need to address the high level of youth unemployment, saying the oceans economy could help to alleviate the problem. 

“It is important that we save the youth from unemployment, under-skilling, and generational poverty,” she said.

She added that the City of eThekwini would be employing more young people in both junior and senior management positions, especially in engineering. 

She said senior engineers should impart skills to their youthful colleagues as the city did not want “to disturb them when they are on retirement by requesting them to come back and be consultants”.

“We also urge the private sector to employ more youth. They must relax the requirements for all the junior posts by reviewing the years of ­experience required,” Gumede said.

She also spoke out against the phenomenon of “blessers” and “slay queens”, saying the country had to discourage this. 

“Young women must be discouraged from taking favours from old men. The best thing to do is to slay with your education. Don’t be pressured by society to get a VIP ticket. Don’t fall into temptation in order to go to Dubai and post on Instagram,” she said. 
The Mercury