Durban - The University of KwaZulu-Natal has reason to celebrate. This week the tertiary institution was named one of the top 100 universities in the Times Higher Education (THE) Young University Rankings 2018. The university's corporate relations unit said they were overjoyed to have found out that they were ranked number 83 with UKZN being the only South African University to feature in the top 100 list.
THE is the leading provider of higher education data for the world's research-led institutions. A company behind the world’s most influential university rankings with almost five decades of experience as a source of analysis and insight on higher education, THE boasts unparalleled expertise on the trends underpinning university performance globally.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Young University Rankings are part of a suite of THE tables focused on universities that, unlike many of the world’s top-ranked universities, do not have centuries of history or tradition.

The Times Higher Education Young University Rankings list the world’s best universities aged 50 years or under. 

This rings true for the University of KwaZulu-Natal which was formed on January 1, 2004 after the merger between the University of Durban-Westville and the University of Natal whose cutting-edge research in the natural, biomedical, humanities and social sciences;innovative curricula; dynamic teaching and learning; state-of-the-art laboratories; as well as accredited professional degrees have earned its reputation as a leading higher education institution on the African continent.

UKZN has a proud and rich heritage of academic excellence. In 2010, the institution celebrated 100 years of higher education – a centenary of scholarship, innovation and community engagement.

This latest feat in the form of the Times Higher Education Young University Rankings 2018 is another feather in the UKZN’s cap which could not have been achieved without the continued strategic thinking, hard work and dedication of the University’s community as a whole in the form of the various committees of Management, Council, staff, students, alumni as well as partners and donors.
The Mercury