Durban - KwaZulu-Natal internet users are likely to choose mobile devices over the traditional desktop PCs or laptops - almost 60% of all the analysed transactions were made via smartphone. This is according to a study conducted by picodi.com. The study also found that 32% are purchases made using the computer, while tablet shopping is - unsurprisingly - only 8%. 



Picodi, an online shopping site that collates sales information for shoppers from various online stores, analysed several millions of online transactions made by online shoppers in 2017. Their data revealed precisely how much money is being spent as per types of users’ devices, hottest months for e-shopping, most popular days of the week and even favourite time of the day. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads



The study also found that when it came to the average spendings, desktop PCs or laptop users tend to spend the lowest amount of their money—just R408 of average cart value—whereas tablet shoppers are spending slightly above R474. Smartphones e-shopping is clearly the stake winner averaging R710. There is an interesting R167 difference between Android and iOS users’ expenses: R793 for the former and R627 for the latter.





When comparing months, the last quarter of the year is characterized by the highest shopping activity. On the contrary - according to our study - users are not keen on buying online during the first half of the year. The most obvious reason for the discrepancy is the fact that South African consumers take full advantage of the shopping festivals taking place during the final months of the year. Needles to mention that in November, when Black Friday and Cyber Monday are celebrated, the average order value rises up to almost R368.



Which day of the week is the most popular amongst the inhabitants of KwaZulu-Natal? Both groups - computers and smartphones users - choose Friday.



For the sake of thoroughness, we’ve also divided 24 hours into equal parts to better understand which time of the day is the most popular for doing online shopping. At night (midnight to 6am) KwaZulu-Natal users are finalizing only 6% of the total purchases. In the morning this percentage increases to 29%, reaching its peak during the day (noon to 6pm) - almost 40% of daily online orders in KwaZulu-Natal are made during these hours. In the evening (6pm to midnight), on the orther hand, this amount decreases to 29% When shopping online KwaZulu-Natal users most often buy clothes, as well as home and garden amenities. Electronics are also among the most popular products.


The Mercury