Durban - eThekwini Municipality mayor Zandile Gumede has vowed to clamp down on those “stealing from the poor”.
In her maiden State of the City address, at the Durban City Hall on Thursday, Gumede said the municipality would deal harshly with corruption. 

She said the City Integrity and Investigations Unit had completed 326 probes into fraud and corruption in the past financial year. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This, according to Gumede, had led to arrests for the sale of RDP houses, jobs and plastic rubbish bags. 

Some had created fraudulent municipal payslips as well as councillors’ letters. 

However, she said they would not “name and shame” people on the basis of allegations.

“We will do it through legal actions, not newspapers and fake social media accounts. We will go to the courts because they are the ones that take decisions,” she said.

Gumede condemned the intimidation of officials from the auditor-general’s office, saying the matter was being dealt with by Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube. 

Gumede also “put her foot down” on the matter of project stoppages. 

“This is a serious challenge. We have seen forums that are stopping work in the city we welcome the efforts by the office of the premier to deal with this matter politically and legally.”

The city has set aside R5million for an incubation project to capacitate small businesses. 

“We will unbundle the opportunities for the benefit of local contractors, black professionals, black business in general and Africans in particular,” she said. 

“We have identified those areas that will be lucrative for economic transformation.”

This would come from the total municipal budget of R45.8billion, with R38.7bn of this being the operational budget. Of this, 19% came from property rates. 

Residents with properties valued at under R230000 are exempt from paying rates, but no rates are charged for the first R120000 of properties valued above this amount. 

A rates rebate, of no more than R4364 for pensioners, child-headed households, disability grantees and the medically boarded, was approved. 

The mayor said the city was committed to doing its part to reduce costs, and measures included the use of vehicles along with fuel, overtime, security costs, catering and consultant costs being closely monitored, she said. 
The Mercury