Durban - Steve Middleton will on Friday officially take up the post of head of the city’s metro police.
Middleton comes into the post in an official capacity after having acted in the position since August last year, when he took over from ­Eugene Nzama. 

In an interview with The Mercury, Middleton said he had been informed of the ­appointment on Monday. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I was preparing a presentation for the crime meeting later that day when I was ­handed my letter of appointment,” he said. 

With an illustrious policing career that spans 40 years, Middle­ton brings decades of experience to the role. 

“I started my policing ­career on January 5, 1978, when I was called up to the military police in the SADF. I went through the rank levels of second lieutenant, lieutenant, captain and then major. I have been an officer commanding of a military-police base, as well as being second in command at some bases. I resigned on May31, 1990 at the rank of major,” he said. 

Middleton noted that his appointment date at the helm of the metro police on June1 is 28 years to the day since he joined the eThekwini municipality.

Prior to his role in the metro police, Middleton spent almost 14 years in security management

Middleton said that in the role of acting commissioner he had set various measures in place, including the filling of vacancies within the metro ­police and the recruitment of officers (the last recruitment drive was initiated in 2010), increasing of skills development and a host of other programmes. 

Although thrilled at his ­appointment, Middleton said he was not blind to the fact that he would face many challen­ges, including other people’s sentiments about his appointment. 

“I did not appoint myself, a strategic panel did. I will not allow that to hinder me in the way forward. I have the best interests of my colleagues, the city and the community at heart,” he said. 

“There is no doubt the city is facing challenges, and we as metro police need to be sensitive to some social challenges, while not forgetting our policing role,” he said. 

When asked what legacy he would like to leave, Middleton said he believed it had already started. 

“This metro police is attaining status as the best in the country. I will also pay attention to youth development,” he said. 
The Mercury