Durban - Raw sewage which has been leaking into a river for months has formed dams of sludge close to a number of businesses in Westmead, Pinetown area.
A publishing company in Mahogany Road said it had been complaining about the issue and unbearable smell.

The Mercury visited the area on Wednesday and found 
that part of the river has 
been heavily polluted. In two of its sections, dams of sewage had formed. Next to the river are several large industrial sewer tanks.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 “It’s much better today than it has been for the past few months. Even the water 
is clearer. 

“The situation has been quite bad, even the rocks have turned brown because of this,” said a security official working for one of the companies.

“This has been ongoing for the past few months, the stench is unbearable. I suspect that there are also some companies ‘above us’ that have been dumping chemicals in the river, worsening the situation,” he said.

He said workers who said they were from eThekwini Municipality had visited the area on Tuesday.



“They had come to check what was happening as they had received many complaints from us. After checking, they told me that it was not a sewer leak. They said a leak had been fixed but it seemed some of the waste had seeped into the  ground and was just coming out now. They said it would be washed away with the rains,” he said.

Raymond Moodley, a health safety officer at Paarl Media, said he had reported the problem to the municipality several times and to date nothing had been done.

“It seems like there is a sewer leak in one of the companies that operate above us, and that leak has been an ongoing problem for the past two months,” he said.

“We have reported the matter to the municipality on several occasions. In one instance after we complained, a contractor was sent out but could not do anything.” 

Moodley said he was told by the contractor that there was 
a leak.

“But they could not fix it without a purchase order number, because without it, they would not get paid for 
the work.”

He said they were concerned about the situation and the impact it would have on workers. “We have about 250 people working there. It’s getting very difficult to work in such a condition, with the stench.” 

eThekwini Municipality had not responded to a request for comment at the time of publish.
The Mercury