Durban - This week government revealed their plans to educate young school girls about pregnancy termination and the morning-after pill. 
In an article published in The Mercury on Tuesday, the move was announced after government noted more than 15 000 schoolgirls falling pregnant in a single year. The proposal caused a stir among readers.

In a poll run on Twitter, with 104 votes, 41% of readers were all for the lessons, while 31% were against it and 28% saying they were neither for nor against it, as long as pupils were educated. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads




 




 On The Mercury Facebook page, Lulu Bingham beieved that government should stop giving grants. 

"Feed them the damn pill. Stop giving government grants for each baby born, they will soon stop having babies and opt for the pill. Another thing is the grannies end up having to raise their children. It's shocking!" she said. 
Debbie Hemmens-Agates said this option was the easy way out. 
"It is not politically correct to mention the abstinence word so let us just say 'they are doing it anyway and help them along'. Selling our teens so short instead of giving them information to make wise decisions that will set them up for a good life up ahead. I am a part of a group of ladies in our country who speak abstinence along with better sexual choices - we have wonderful, helpful conversations with teens so that they are aware of the risks of their choices. Many do not have safe spaces to ask their questions. We need more of this, not more abortions. Why have adults become so scared of setting the value bar high? It is like down on the ground right now. No one has anything to aim at!" she said. 
Another poster, Cilla Webster, said it was outrageous. 



The proposed policy ushers in what is internationally known as Comprehensive Sexuality Education (CSE)

Read: Government wants schoolgirls to learn about pregnancy termination

The public has until the end of July to comment on the Basic Education Department's draft policy of the prevention and management of pupils' pregnancy. 

The Mercury