Durban - Umlazi residents desperate for land are clearing vegetation at Silverglen Nature Reserve in Chatsworth in preparation to build homes.
No physical structures have been built yet pending “negotiations” between the leaders of the community and the relevant authorities. 

The encroachment into the reserve is the latest in a string of land invasions that have hit the city.  

Community members, who spoke to The Mercury but declined to be named, said the “land invasion” started a few weeks ago.

One person, who had assumed that The Mercury reporter was there to look for land, advised that it would be unwise to reveal if we were 
not from Umlazi as the land was only for people from the township. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

One community member, who was busy working to clear the land in the dense forest, admitted that she was concerned about the legality of the process and wondered whether the municipality would allow them to take over the land.

“At this stage, we are still busy marking the plots and 
no one has put up a structure yet. 

“Almost every inch of this forest has been marked. Where you see land cleared or plastic containers placed, that means that piece of land belongs to someone,” she said. 

She said she was desperate for land.

“I am renting. I have two children and one grandchild. All these people need to have private space of their own, so we really need land.” 

Ward councillor Tony Govender said he was concerned about what was going on. 

“There is a small community of people that live in the area who had been living there for decades. We might have to move them because they are being threatened.”

He said when the invaders started clearing land they 
had said that they were only 
interested in the land and had no problem with the community there.

However, he said the situation had changed recently when those invading the land had clashed with municipal security. 

“They (land invaders) said they would come back that night and attack the small community and, later that night, there was an attempted petrol bombing of one of the houses there,” he said.

Metro spokesperson Parboo Sewpersad said the municipal land invasion team was monitoring the situation. 

“The people have been ‘creeping’ in over the past few weeks. With the help of the SAPS we have engaged and pushed them back.”

eThekwini Municipality’s acting head of communications, Mandla Nsele, said the city was aware of the situation. 

“As with all land invasions, we have had teams on site accompanied by enforcement, attempting to stop the invasions,” said Nsele. 

He said the city was concerned with the spate of land invasions and was aware that land was a scarce resource and the municipality had an obligation to protect it. 
The Mercury