Durban - The We Are One Festival, aimed at bringing people from different races and backgrounds together, will be held at the Princess Magogo Stadium in KwaMashu this month.
The City of Durban and Durban Tourism in partnership with The Sharks, Golden Arrows FC and Amazulu FC, have all thrown their weight behind the social cohesion festival from June 23-24.

The festival aims to have people from different backgrounds and ethnic groups being united by sport over the two-day festival, which will include residents from KwaMashu and Phoenix.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Festival founder Jacinta Ngobese approached Vivian Reddy, chairperson of Sibaya Casino and founder of the Edison Group, with the idea of the festival after bumping into him at a hotel, and three years later the festival is growing in stature and support.

“I’ll forever be grateful to you, Mr Reddy, because as a girl from KwaMashu all it took was just one person to believe in my dream, and you are that one person,” said Ngobese. 

Reddy said the initiative was important to bring people together. “Right now in this country there is so much racial tension, you read it on social media, and there are so many things that are going on so many years into our democracy, which is unacceptable, and initiatives like this must be applauded for bringing people together,” said Reddy.

Deputy mayor Fawzia Peer said the city worked hard to maintain its position as a leading domestic tourist destination, and partnering with the sporting clubs for this event was a good opportunity for brand awareness.

Minister of Energy Jeff Radebe, who was born in KwaMashu, has been supporting the festival with his family since it began in 2016. He said he believed the event was the “ingredient” to bring South Africa to the non-racial future Nelson Mandela dreamt of.

Sharks chiefs operating officer Eduard Coetzee said the club was proud to be part of the festival. He said the influence sport could have on creating social cohesion was immense.

The first day of the festival will start with a fun walk from Phoenix to Princess Magogo Stadium in KwaMashu, then an exhibition match between Golden Arrows and Amazulu FC. Activities will culminate with the SuperSport Rugby Challenge between the Cell C Sharks and the Cheetahs.
The Mercury