Durban - The singing of Struggle songs, which contain racial slurs, during workplace strikes has come into the spotlight in a Constitutional Court case in which workers were dismissed for singing songs.
Arguments were heard on Thursday in the Concourt in an application for leave to appeal against a decision of the Labour Court, which had upheld a decision of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) that had found that the workers should not have been fired for singing a Struggle song. 

The matter comes after the court earlier this month ruled that a white training officer who had referred to a contractor as “swart man”, Afrikaans for “black man”, while angry over a parking dispute, was racist and warranted dismissal from his job.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In the present case, the matter has been brought on appeal to the Concourt by manufacturing company Duncanmec (Pty) Ltd, which had dismissed nine employees for singing a Struggle song, with lyrics which loosely translated as: “Climb over the roof and tell them that my mom is rejoicing if I hit a Boer.’’

According to the company, the song was directed at “white management”. The employees were subsequently charged with participating in unlawful strike action and singing a racially offensive song in 2013. They were found guilty on both charges and given final warnings for the first offence and dismissed for the second. 

Duncanmec said the conduct of the nine employees was so severe that the management had felt “threatened and offended” and the incident had irreparably eroded the trust relationship between employer and employees. 

However, when the matter came before the Metal and Engineering Industries Bargaining Council, the arbitrator ordered the reinstatement of the dismissed workers. 

The Labour Court also found that the strike was short-lived, not violent, and that Duncanmec had not shown that the song was prohibited in terms of a workplace rule.

The Labour Court also found that the song was part of the history and struggle for workers’ rights and could not be seen as misconduct. 

In its heads of argument before the Constitutional Court, Duncanmec argued that political protest songs, while appropriate when it had been directed at the apartheid regime, had no place in the modern workplace. 

The company said in this instance a racially charged song was sung in the face of management in a disrespectful and aggressive way, and, properly construed, falls to be considered as racist conduct or hate speech worthy of dismissal. 

But the third respondent, the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa), which is acting on behalf of the dismissed workers, argued that it could not be said that the employment relationship had broken down irreparably. 

Numsa contends that the issue of the song was irrelevant to the matter and even if the song was deemed racist it did not automatically warrant dismissals. 

Paul Hoffman, a director of Accountability Now, said while other cases involving Struggle songs had come before the courts, this was the first in the context of labour. “What distinguishes this case is that the relationship between worker and employer ought to be based on co-operation, mutual respect and the willingness to work together towards a common goal. This is difficult to do if employers feel that the lyrics have upset the ongoing relationship of trust.” 

He said this was likely to be a difficult judgment and it was unfortunate that the litigation had gone so far and the relationship broken down to such an extent because of a line in a song. However he cautioned that in order to truly be united in our diversity, instances of racial slurs from all races needed to be dealt with.  

Lawson Naidoo, executive secretary of the Council for the Advancement of the South African Constitution, said this case was an opportunity for court to clarify the law related to freedom of speech and what constitutes hate speech as the judicial clarification was long overdue. 

Phephelaphi Dube, director of the Centre for Constitutional Rights, agreed, saying it was important for the court to clarify the matter once and for all.  

“One needs to bear in mind the context in which the Struggle song was sung. The question is objective, not subjective, which means it doesn’t matter if it offended or hurt you to hear those words, but rather what was the intention.”
The Mercury