Durban - Uncertainty hangs over the future appearance of Durban’s iconic port control building, the Millennium Tower.
According to the port engineer, Malefetsane Setaka, and Captain Justin Adams, the deputy harbour master in charge of vessel traffic services, the rotating steel cowl that surrounded the Millennium Tower was badly damaged in the freak storm that struck Durban South, including the port, on October 10 last year.

The cowl on top of the tower, which gave it its distinctive appearance, was designed to rotate with the direction of the wind, but had not been operational for some time, and the storm exacerbated matters - which they referred to as structural challenges.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The tower also suffered other major structural damage, including to its wind vane, and major leaks throughout the building. As a result of these problems, port control employees were relocated to temporary premises elsewhere in the port and a standby port control room was set up at the Durmarine Building next to the Ocean Terminal Building, using all the same technology, including radars and vessel traffic ­services (VTS) log.

Meanwhile, a decision was taken to remove the cowl and, according to the two officials, the Transnet National Ports Authority is evaluating the best concepts for its replacement, “because the previous structure - while aesthetically attractive - posed numerous maintenance challenges”.Initial repairs to the building have since been completed and port control employees returned to their offices in the tower during April.

What is noticeable is that the red and green lights used to indicate incoming or outgoing ships are now much brighter and more easily seen.

The tower, however, now shorn of its cowl, appears naked on the Bluff peninsula, and whatever decision and design the engineers and those controlling the purse strings come up with, Durban deserves to have one of its most striking man-made features returned to prominence and position. The architect responsible for its multiple-award-winning design, Don Albert of Soundspacedesign (now Don Albert Architects), describes the tower as a politically neutral abstraction of local forms, derived from the land (a budding sugarcane root), the sea (shells and fish) and nautical imagery (sails, masts, cranes and funnels) and an architectural expression for the port of Durban.

“A barometer for the city, it will communicate fluctuations of sun, wind and tide, while symbolising the growth of our city into the third millennium.” Inspiring words, but sadly things didn’t always go  the way they should have right from the beginning. 

A competition was held in 1999 to choose the winning concept, open to KZN architects, to design a tower to act both for port control purposes and also as a landmark for the city. Some highly impressive options were presented for the judges to ­select a winner.

Work commenced on the tower in 2001 and was completed the following year - incidentally, a time capsule was placed in a special casket beneath a marker stone, containing memorabilia and keepsakes from the period, with a copy of The Mercury shipping page included. On August 28, 2002, the newly completed cowl was lifted into place on the tower using South Africa’s largest mobile crane, brought by road from Gauteng. Then, only finishing touches remained for the Millennium Tower to be completed.

The 31m-high cowl was designed to face into the wind through a
motor-driven wind vane at the back, helping to position the cowl correctly. At night the cowl was to be lit by a series of high-powered lights indicating wind direction. 

A 2m sleeve would travel up and down the central spire to show the state of the tide, and several strobe lights flashing upwards or downwards near the top of the spire indicated if the tide was incoming or outgoing. It was also intended for Durban’s Millennium Tower to be brightly illuminated at night, and highly visible for a considerable distance. The 75m tower (85m to the tip), by itself as large as the Statute of Liberty, also housed a search and rescue centre and provided port control officers on duty perfect 360-degree visibility for the first time, as well as the best view in Durban!
The Mercury