Durban - EThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede says unlocking opportunities within the ocean economy can be an effective way of dealing with the high levels of youth unemployment.
Speaking at the launch of Youth Month on Sunday, Gumede warned that youth unemployment was a ticking time bomb and had to be addressed urgently.

“Addressing youth unemployment is central to the achievement of the 2030 NDP target of 6% unemployment, as youth accounts for more than 60% of the unemployed in South Africa,” she said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The mayor encouraged young people to explore opportunities in the maritime sector, adding that the country was looking to unlock opportunities in the ocean economy which she said had remained largely untransformed.

“Unlocking of the Oceans Economy will provide us with needed jobs for our economy and society. It is important that we save the youth from unemployment, underskilling, black tax and the generational curse of poverty,” she said.

Gumede later re-emphasised the importance of the ocean economy and job creation when she hosted a high-level delegation from the city of Bremen in Germany.

Gumede thanked the Bremen delegation for the co-operation the two cities enjoyed, saying this had translated into many programmes that had had a positive impact on the lives of eThekwini residents.

The two cities had collaborated on such programmes as the recently launched marine project, aimed at promoting the protection of the marine environment.

“Our co-operation will also enable us to impact on the education of young people through the Bremen-Durban Ocean Champs programme. 

“I am looking forward to the impact that this programme will have on our ocean and the empowerment of our youth. 

“The exchange programmes between Bremen and Durban, targeting university students, will also have a positive impact on their careers and promote stronger German-South African relations.” 

Gumede said the co-operation on the Go! Durban, the citys new rapid bus system, and Bremen’s support for eThekwini city planners had also yielded positive results.

The mayor said the city would be looking to enhance co-operation with the German government in many other areas, including agriculture, training and development.
The Mercury