Durban - Operation Thunder, a robust crime-fighting initiative set up by police, is due to begin in the province in the next few weeks. The operation, according to police minister, General Bheki Cele, has yielded success in other parts of the country, including Cape Town, and Cele is hoping the same can be achieved in KwaZulu-Natal. He was speaking during a visit to the province last week to sympathise with the family of a young girl who was shot. 

Last week, the community was left reeling after two botched hijackings claimed the lives of two people. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

On Monday. Sadia Sukhraj, 9, was killed after three men tried to hijack her father’s car in Shallcross. 

Sukhraj was shot in the abdomen during the ordeal. On Thursday, a Kelly Chetty was killed after four armed men tried to hijack his car, a VW Golf R. Chetty’s children were in the car at the time of the attack. 

The Democratic Alliance’s Spokesperson on Community Safety and Liaison, Dr Rishigen Viranna, MPL, said there was an urgent need for the reinstatement of specialised anti-crime units, in particular the anti-hijacking unit

“Our province is under attack and something has to be done. According to the national Crime Statistics, KwaZulu-Natal was second only to Gauteng in 2017 when it comes to vehicle theft and car hijackings, with 3 029 hijackings reported,” he said. 

Commenting on the plans to bring Operation Thunder to KZN, the DA’s Dianne Kohler Barnard said Cele inherited a poorly structured SAPS.

“The minister seems to be on a mission to reconstruct.  Various commissions have confirmed that the SAPS in the Western Cape is poorly resourced. Crime is a national and provincial competency falling under the current government,” she said. 

Kohler Barnard added that in KZN - specifically in Wentworth- the situation is similar to the situation in the Western Cape in terms of gangsterism. 

“Additionally there are continuing political and taxi murders, cash in transit heists, and increasing numbers of violent protest, hijackings, drug manufacturing and selling and home invasions.  Cele has assigned the most decorated SAPS officer in SA, General Nhlanhla Lucky Mkhwanazi to run KZN and as a top expert in operations I predict that mass arrests are on the cards,” she said. 

She added that he was hoping that Cele will at last reform the enormously successful specialised units - narcotics and anti-hijacking - shut down by Jackie Selebi.

The Mercury