Durban - Two Durban men charged in connection with two separate road crashes which both had tragic consequences have been released on bail pending their appeals in the cases.
On Monday, Hillcrest-based personal trainer Stephan Bothma was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment, of which he has to serve six months in jail in terms of legislation under the Criminal Procedure Act, and fined R10 000 or 10 months, half of which was suspended.

Bothma was sentenced by Magistrate Phumlani Bhengu after he pleaded guilty to a drunk-driving crash last year that left a woman paralysed and another with head injuries. 

His driver’s licence was also suspended for six months.  

In the incident last June, a couple, Hamresin and Taariqa Archary, along with Taariqa’s sister Varsha Maharaj, were waiting at a red traffic light when Bothma ploughed into their car. 

While Hamresin was not injured, Taariqa was left permanently paralysed and Varsha suffered brain injuries.

Archary’s friends and family filled the courtroom to listen to Magistrate Bhengu deliver his sentencing. 

In handing down a jail sentence, Bhengu said two educated and productive members of society had been severely affected. 

“A very useful engineer (Taariqa) is left in a wheelchair, not being able to continue to help our country become a better place. She is unable to earn an income. She is unable to have her own children. Judging from their medical reports, they are improving slightly each and every day, but they will never be themselves again. Their situation can never be reversed.”

He added that he found Bothma’s version that he did not remember the crash to be unbelievable. 

Speaking outside court, Taariqa said Bothma had shown no remorse. 

“If he actually showed remorse, I think it would have made a bigger difference because in that way at least you know that he would not do it again,” she said.

Hamresin said: “We want others not to drink and drive. We have been pushing to really get the message out and make a difference.  

Founder and director of South Africans Against Drink Driving (Sadd) Caro Smit was present during sentencing. 

“Why should there be any consideration for first-time offenders, because drinking and driving is a very serious crime but it’s not seen like that in South Africa,” she said. 

Bothma’s bail was extended and he was granted leave to appeal against the three-year sentence.

Meanwhile, Omesh Ramnarain, who was found guilty on two counts of culpable homicide relating to the deaths of two Durban cyclists, was yesterday granted R30 000 bail pending the outcome of his appeal against his conviction and sentence. 

Ramnarain, who was sentenced to 10years in prison, launched a bail bid in the Durban High Court.

Handing down judgment, Judge Mokgere Masipa found that Ramnarain had reasonable prospects of success in his appeal and therefore should be granted bail.

The judge also said there was no evidence to suggest that Ramnarain would abscond, endanger public safety or interfere or undermine the criminal justice system.
The Mercury