Durban - The winter chill did very little to put a dampener on the spirit of things at Vodacom Durban July Young Designer Award, presented by the Durban Fashion Fair, semi-finals held recently. 
More than 120 students, from six fashion colleges across KwaZulu-Natal appeared in front of a panel to explain their interpretation of the theme "It Is Time".AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The panel of judges included well known Durban designers Terrence Bray and Sandile 'Duke' Mngadi, lecturer Greg Wallace, and Sindi Shangase from the Durban Fashion Fair, co-ordinated by Vodacom Durban July Fashion Programme director Tiffany Prior.
Shangase said the event was a "long and agonising session."
"It was quite interesting, especially the interpretations of the theme. Some designers were so close to the theme and some were so far off you could see that they didn't understand the theme itself. Some of the designers that were spot on theme were let down by poor execution, while others who missed the theme came forward with so really great execution in their garments. That made the judging tough," she said. 


Shangase said the depth and quality of the entry had made judging difficult, but left her inspired.

"It gives us hope in terms of the future that there are more designers come up and willing to join the industry," she added. 

The 30 semi-finalists will come before another panel of judges at the popular fashion show at Greyville Racecourse on in the next few days, where the entry will be reduced to ten finalists. Entry to the show is free of charge.



The finalists chosen for the Vodacom Durban July Young Designer Award, presented by Durban Fashion Fair are:
Makhosazana Ntshangase, Nonjabulo Shabalala, Nosipho Ntuli, Makhosazana Ntshangase, Siyabonga Phakathi, Tayla Simpson, Chané Lange, Kelly Knock, Zintle Poswa, Nicola Colyn, Nhlosenhle Cele, Babalwa Matiyela, Yowa Batubenga, Silungile Dlamini, Nhlakanipho Ximba, Alexandra van Heerden, Tebogo Mokope, Andile Nsele, Minenhle Memela, Thobile Dlamini, Kelly Love, Aaliah Docrat, Mhlengi Mngoma, Siyabonga Mahlaba, Georgino Brink, Masego Motseokae, Sicelinhlanhla Ngcobo, Gracious Lubisi.
The Mercury