Durban - A scheduled but still unexpected visitor to Durban last week was HMS Protector, the Royal Navy’s ice-strengthened polar patrol vessel.
The ship is spending a week or so at the Durban Naval Base on Salisbury Island where she will undergo routine maintenance and any necessary repairs while also effecting a crew change.

The latter activity must be a fairly unusual for the port of Durban, insofar as “foreign” naval ships are concerned, but nevertheless a very welcome one. Perhaps this is a sign that our naval base in Durban really is returning to life and full activity.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

HMS Protector was commissioned into the Royal Navy on June 23, 2011 to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty. 

As an ice-strengthened warship, she helps enforce the treaty while undertaking lengthy (20 months and more) patrols of the Southern Ocean, with brief diversions to related areas as required.

The Antarctic Treaty was signed into place by involved nations to ensure that the Antarctic environment remains fully protected from exploitation and that scientific research has priority.

At her commissioning, the then British minister for defence equipment, support and technology, Peter Luff, said: “The commissioning of HMS Protector reaffirms our commitment to maintaining the Ice Patrol capability which demonstrates the UK’s commitment to helping preserve the Antarctic as a natural reserve. 

“She will carry out important work supporting the hydrographic and oceanographic work conducted in the region, which complements 
the international effort to continue to assess the impact of climate change.”

The ship’s history is a little different from most other ships in the Royal Navy, in that despite the date of her commissioning, she was launched in 2001 for a Norwegian company, GC Rieber Shipping. 

Her name then was Polarbjorn, meaning Polar Bear, but she went on charter to the RN for three years during the period that another naval research ship, HMS Endurance, was under consideration. 

Evidently the Royal Navy was suitably impressed and HMS Protector was subsequently acquired and absorbed in the traditional manner into the navy.

Some changes were made at the time of her absorption fully into the navy. These included re-siting the helipad from a raised position high on the front of the ship ahead of the bridge and accommodation area, to a more traditional naval position low on the stern.

The ship is lightly armed, mainly with machineguns and so-called mini-guns as well as having a helicopter to improve her ability for carrying out long-range patrols.

She is a slightly larger version of the RRS Ernest Shackleton, the British Antarctic Survey ship - the 
4 985-gt Protector has a length of 90m and beam of 18m whereas the 4 028-gt RRS Ernest Shackleton is 80m long and 17m wide.  Both ships were built in Norway by Kvaerner for Rieber Shipping, Shackleton’s original name being Polar Queen.

Incidentally, South Africa became a part of the Antarctic Treaty from its very inception along with the other 11 countries active on the ice continent at the time and was born out of the International Geophysical Year in 1957-8. Those countries were Argentina, Australia, Belgium, 
Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the (then) Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The Mercury