Cape Town - Missing Cape Town psychologist, Diane Nelson, 49, has been confirmed dead.This was confirmed by SAPS spokesperson, Lieutenant Colonel Andrè Traut: "This office can confirm that the body of a 49-year-old female was discovered on Thursday on Table Mountain. The circumstances surrounding her death are under investigation and a death inquest case docket has been registered."AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by TeadsNelson went missing on Saturday and her abandoned car was discovered parked outside Cecilia Forest the same night‚ reportedly with many of her valuables inside.She thereafter reported missing at Claremont police station.The Pink Ladies, on their Facebook page said:"It is with deep regret that we announce the passing of Diane Nelson MHDSRIP. Our condolences to her parents, children extended family, colleagues and friends. Grateful thanks to Saps Claremont, Const Nkonki, Col Ricks Wynberg cluster, Sgt Visser Saps dog unit, Saps Air Wing, Tim Lundy/Andy Wood Wilderness Search and Rescue, communities, volunteers, PLTT/PLVT and all other role players who assisted in finding her."Many others shared their condolences:Tasneem Edwards: Condolences to the family and loved ones. Diane was an amazing person and therapist. She has helped me and so many others. May her soul RIP.you will always be remembered.Linda Tye Diane: I'm sure you knew what having you as my therapist did for me and I know I thanked you on that difficult day when my therapy came to an end, but I wish I could thank you one more time. I heard of your disappearance on Sunday morning and I have been praying so hard for your safe return. You changed my life for the better and I will never forget how you saved me. I can't believe that you're gone. The world has lost a beautiful soul. Your caring and your kindness lives on through all whose lives you touched. Rest in peace. And thank you. May your family, friends and colleagues find the strength they need to celebrate your life and find gratitude in their hearts for having had you in their lives instead of the sadness they feel at your loss. Fly free, beautiful soul.Diane Anderson: Sincere condolences to all her family and friends. From the messages on this site it is evident Diane was an incredible person who played a vital role in the lives of many. May she rest in peace. Many thanks indeed to Pink ladies, SAPS and ALL those in supporting roles. At least we knew all was being done to find Diane that was humanly possible.@TheCapeArgusCape Argus