Durban - City mayor, Zandile Gumede, has said the municipality will continue to make youth development a priority. Gumede, who spoke at a Youth Month rally at the Moses Mabhida Stadium at the weekend, reaffirmed the city’s commitment to youth development as a meeting of the city’s Executive Committee (EXCO) on Tuesday. 

Gumede thanked the youth, their parents, councillors, organisers and officials for putting together a successful event at the stadium on Sunday. 

“We are also grateful to our speakers from the maritime industry as well as our keynote speaker MEC of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs Sihle Zikalala for his words of wisdom. We also pledge to continue with activities that are aimed at empowering young people from an early child development age because we are a caring city,” the mayor said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Gumede added that the development of young people is not an event but a process undertaken through empowerment programmes.

The mayor further applauded the work by the Youth Development Office in this regard saying youth constitutes 60% of the eThekwini population.

“It is important for us to walk alongside young people so they can see first-hand what we are doing for them. We also need to capacitate the younger generation to ensure that they will be part of team Durban and know practically how the city is run,” she said. 

Mayor Gumede said creative solutions to problems in the city was needed citing a launch taking place on June 21 where a platform is being created for young people addicted to whoonga to be rehabilitated.

“As leaders in the city we need to do something about the growing number of whoonga boys in the inner city. Too effectively fight crime in the city does not mean we have to arrest them but instead come up with creative solutions. The Safer Cities Unit must run with this initiative. The success of this project can perhaps be rolled out to the whole city,” Gumede said. 

She added that  the volunteers of the initiative have called social workers, a local FET College, the Skills Department from both the city and province as well as other relevant stakeholders to work with them to positively change these young boys’ lives.

“If we do it as a collective, working together as councillors, officials and business, we will get positive results,” she said. 

The Mercury