Durban - National Health minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi and KZN Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo have expressed their satisfaction with operations at the condom factory situated at Dube TradePort, near the King Shaka International Airport.

The two recently did a walkabout at the operations. The project is a joint venture between SA Health Protection Services and US based company HBM, who have formed HBM-SA.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The facility produces 700 000 condoms per day for the local and export markets, and is expected to double its output soon, as it continues to build capacity.

Among the HBM-SA production line is the government’s Max condoms, which replaced the Choice brand.

The new R150 million factory is regarded as a coup for KwaZulu-Natal as it will create up to 150 local jobs in its first development phase. Previously, SA Health imported all its stock from a manufacturer in China. However, once government instituted the Special Economic Zone incentives programme, the company decided to locate their production within Dube TradePort’s Special Economic Zone. This proves yet again that such zones are an effective means to drive investment in local manufacturing and exports.

Commenting after the visit, Dhlomo said the minister was pleased with what he saw. 

Job creation

"He is looking forward to coming back for the official launch of the facility, which is expected soon. The Minister was impressed to see that this factory has the capacity to produce 1,4 million condoms per day. We are looking forward to coming back with the minister for the formal launch of this HBM-SA condom factory," Dhlomo said. 

He explained that the company had already started employing locally, and has 35 staff members and will go up to 150 breadwinners. 

"If you multiply that by five, it will contribute to our economy, and in terms of money in the pockets of some of our citizens in KZN. Here in KZN, we have reaped the most rewards through this factory, because there will not be a shortage of condoms in KZN. Also, when the condom distribution programme is extended to SADC countries, it becomes very easy for them to be transported, because the airport is right next door," he said. 



Condoms are still regarded as one of the safest measures to prevent the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases and unwanted pregnancies.

Statistics show that in South Africa, women and girls aged 15 – 24 are at highest risk of contracting HIV; while unplanned pregnancies contribute significantly to the high drop-out rate at high schools and institutions of tertiary education. 

MEC Dhlomo added that government was continuing to promote Dual Protection as a strategy to curb unwanted pregnancies and sexually-transmitted infections such as HIV and others. Dual Protection entails men and boys undergoing Medical Male Circumcision; using condoms during every episode of sexual contact; and all of this coupled with female contraceptive methods.

The Mercury