Durban - The Federation for Radical Economic Transformation (FFRET) has distanced itself from business forums that have invaded construction sites and extorted money from contractors, saying while it ­remains radical, it does not support criminal acts.
The federation, whose affiliates include the Delangoku­bona business forum, said there was a new organisation going around duplicating its programmes in a bid to tarnish its name.

“We note with disgust some individuals and organisations are going around illegally invading sites and establishments. As FFRET we are committed to radical engagements with stakeholders for the real­isation of radical economic transformation (RET),” said Malusi Zondi, the federation’s general secretary.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Zondi was speaking at a press conference on Thursday, where the federation outlined its plans to accelerate the implementation of radical economic transformation programmes to fast-track the inclusion of black people in the mainstream economy.

The federation’s executive lamented what it said was the slow pace of radical economic transformation, saying there appeared to be reluctance on the part of government and the private sector to ensure that transformation of the economy becomes a reality.

“Over the past few months the non-willingness to even mention RET in government programmes is alarming, and had a negative impact on the private sector’s willingness to play its part in fast-tracking RET,” Zondi said. 

“Those private sector stakeholders that had started to move their procurement and business development policies to RET have since either slowed down or abandoned those efforts. We fully blame  government for that,” he said.

The federation applauded the eThekwini municipality, saying it was the only munici­pality that had a radical economic transformation policy.

The federation’s leadership, however, said some officials were reluctant to implement such policies. It said it would engage with the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and with the South African Local Government Association (Salga) to ensure all municipalities adopted pro-RET policies.

Meanwhile, the Delangoku­bona business forum yesterday lambasted the media for referring to it as a business mafia.

The forum said such labels “can only create a conducive environment for police and private security officers to shoot and kill members of a legit business forum who may be raising legitimate concerns”.
The Mercury