Durban - Sodurba Community Tourism Organisation, in their ongoing commitment to promote South Durban as a premier tourism destination, have commissioned local design consultancy, Umcebo Design, to create a 3m long piece of public art - clad in recycled materials - which will be launched at the Welcoming Of The Whales Festival on June 30.
The event is to be held on the Bluff, at Brighton Beach. 
Umcebo Design's Robin Opperman said their brief was to select local partners and also draw on their extensive history of working with recycled materials in the creation of a wide range of high-end decor items, lighting and public art pieces. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"Umcebo specialises in experimentation with recycled and re-purposed materials in their various art and craft projects. Umcebo have artwork that incorporates recycled material in the Durban Art Gallery Permanent Collection; and in 2014 were selected as a World Design Capital Project for our recycled chandeliers," he said. 

Opperman approached the junior and senior art departments at Eden College. 


"Eden College is an Eco-School and has a very forward thinking management team and art department - who value being involved in projects of this nature and who welcome the opportunity to showcase the creative potential of recycled materials. Brigitta Gaylard and Deidre Maree have embraced the challenge and the entire school Art Program are involved in processing recycled bottle tops and attaching these to Bonox fencing panels to create cladding for final use on the Whale," Opperman said. 
Local artist and designer, Mike McFadyean, who has a long history of working with Umcebo Design was asked to create some preliminary sketches and then develop the design into a full digital render and visualisation that helps everyone involved have a clearer vision of the final outcome.

Local fabricators Fabricon are currently assembling materials so that the armature can be constructed and transported to Eden College, so that the cladding can be added to the whale armature, in preparation for the piece being ready for its launch at the Welcoming Of The Whales Festival.
Fabricon CEO, Selwin Swartz, said they were excited about the challenge of making the armature, as this is not only a structural challenge, but also a more creative assignment, compared to their normal work. 
Fabricon is so committed to the process that they will be sponsoring the manufacture and transport of the armature in its non and fully clad forms - as are other sponsors. 
Currently the art pupils at Eden are manufacturing the cladding as the end of the term approaches.
The Mercury