Durban - Energy supplier, Eskom, will be releasing weekly views of energy sent out, peak demand, performance of generating units in terms of the energy availability factor (EAF) and an outlook of three months ahead. This was announced by Eskom during a media briefing on Thursday. 
Eskom's System Operator, Bernard Magoro, gave an overview of the system operator function and took the media through the report explaining the various elements of the report.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“The System Operator is the electricity transport and distribution supervisor whose main role is balancing supply and demand in real-time. It ensures continuous delivery of quality electricity by maintaining a stable grid. The report gives a historical and a future outlook of data that we use in our daily planning to meet South Africa’s electricity demand," Magoro said. 
Eskom Group Chief Executive, Phakamani Hadebe, said they were believed the  transparency is one of the solutions in their goal of building trust. 
"The second one is to deliver honestly on our mandate of delivering electricity to power our nation’s economy," Hadebe added. 
According to chairman of the Eskom Board, Jabu Mabuza, commended the move to reinstate the report.
"I would like to commend Phakamani and his team for once again publicly sharing critical power system status information. It is a step in the right direction in inculcating a culture of effective and transparent leadership and governance. Whilst the risk of load shedding always exists, we remain confident that management is on a direct course to keeping the lights on for South Africa this winter," he said.  
Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, addressed the session welcoming the positive step taken by Eskom to share information that is required by stakeholders in order to make the necessary plans in their businesses and everyday life. 
“I am glad to be in this world-class facility where Eskom monitors supply and demand for the households and businesses in this country. Transparency is a crucial part of accountability and accountability is a crucial part in a democracy. The launch of this system status report is important as the public needs to know what Eskom is doing, how it operates and if there are faultlines, how do they occur and what is done to make things right. I can therefore say it with a level of confidence that we believe Eskom when it says there will be no load shedding this winter unless there is a catastrophe. That’s the kind of assurance that the public wants from us," he said.  

The Minister further congratulated the board on the strides made in following the words of the President at the state of the nation address when he was still Deputy President where he spoke about recapturing state institutions in order to serve the public interest.

“We are pleased that good governance is beginning to embed itself in the organisation and soon Eskom will get enough credibility in the market place to enable it once again to borrow to keep the operations of this organisation going. They will soon look at the operating model in order to make sure that what is called the Eskom Group today is what is required 15 years from now,” added Gordhan. 

Eskom also publishes the medium-term system adequacy outlook (MTSAO) report, which is a requirement of the South African Grid Code – System Operation Code annually. The latest study that was published in October 2017 showed that the system has enough generation capacity to meet expected electricity demand over the next five years (2017 – 2022).
The Mercury