Durban - The objection processing period has been extended to 30 November 2018 following the tabling of a report at a council Executive Committee (EXCO) meeting held this week.

However, homeowners have until 30 June 2018 to object to the valuation of their property.

eThekwini Municipality’s Acting Head of Communications, Mandla Nsele said the report states that according to the Municipality Property Rates Act No of 2004, municipalities are required to revalue properties every four years for rating purposes. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“eThekwini Municipality advertised the third General Valuation Roll on February 9 and closed the objections on May 16. The municipality received 9 927 objections. The initial target date for the completion of all objections was June 30,  2018,” he said. 

The report states that currently 5 208 (which is 52.5%) of the objections received have been processed. 

“However, the report notes, the progress has been hampered by a number of competing priorities within the department that requires the target date to be adjusted. This includes capturing and uploading all objections onto the system, value assist and other system stoppages, continuous market valuation requests by client departments for purchase, sale and lease as well as the proposed valuation of investment properties due by the end of July 2018 among others,” Nsele said. 

Deputy City Manager of Finance, Krish Kumar, said the level of objections in the city was at two percent, which was good compared to another coastal city in South Africa who had objection levels of 10%.

He said that shows that people have confidence in the valuation roll.

According to Kumar, the last time a major evaluation was undertaken it was done over two years, however this time it was attempted to be done in one year. 

He said to ensure that ratepayers are not inconvenienced if they are overcharged, they will be refunded.

“There is a five month time frame with various processes that have to be done. However, the team assures me that they will meet the deadline,” Kumar said.  

The Mercury