Thursday was World No Tobacco Day. Cancercare, a provider of holistic cancer care in the country, wants to highlight the dangers of smoking. But while cigarette smoking is an undisputed cause of lung cancer, not all cases of lung cancer occur in smokers or former smokers.
A startling percentage of people who don’t smoke are diagnosed with lung cancer every year, and these are some of the reasons why, says Dr Charleen Muller, clinical and radiation oncologist at Cancercare’s East London Oncology Centre.

The person who lifts a cigarette to their mouth and puffs away at the chemical-infused smoke is standing in the direct lung-cancer firing line. According to Cancer Research UK, smoking can cause up to 15 types of cancer, including lung and larynx, and 15% of smokers are likely to get the disease. However, statistics have also found that 10% to 15% of non-smokers are likely to get cancer too, especially women. This hardly seems fair if you’ve never smoked, eat all your vegetables and run 20km a day, but the reality is that lung cancer isn’t just about smoke.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Non-smokers are people who have never smoked or who have had less than 100 cigarettes in their lifetime. They are the ones affected by second-hand smoke that regular cigarette users leave behind. 

“While this is a pervasive problem, some of the biggest causes of lung cancer aren’t associated with cigarettes,” 
says Muller. 

According to her, this cancer is more likely to come from the environment and the pollutants made by man.

There is significantly more air pollution and recent studies have shown that the pollution caused by traffic has increased by more than 15% to 20% over the past 15 to 20 years, she points out.

Not only does the rise in nitrogen oxide pose a risk to people driving or living around traffic, but it’s turning the morning run into a deadly pastime. 

Today, runners would be better off doing their training on a treadmill in the air-conditioned gym or in the parks where leaves can reduce the impact of fumes.

“In addition to car and cigarette smoke, lungs are subjected to compounds such as chromium and arsenic in the manufacturing and car paint industries. 

These toxic compounds increase the risk of lung cancer, as they cause mutations to the tissue. One of the most infamous causes of lung disease and cancer is asbestos - a group of minerals used in the building industry. Most buildings have had the material removed, however, it still remains a concern for those who work in or around asbestos-contaminated areas,”  Muller points out.

“Uranium is another mineral that damages the lining of the lung”, she says. 

“Uranium not only affects miners in the actual mines, but it is present in the soil and groundwater, and has been known to accumulate in homes. Radon gas, a by-product of uranium, is also a major cause of lung cancer. It isn’t toxic in minute quantities, but long-term exposure at high levels will make a person sick,” she adds.

Muller says that while many people won’t come across uranium or radon gas on their daily commute, it is important to recognise how severely atmospheric pollutants can impact on health and well-being. Vehicle exhausts, power plants, wood stoves and coal fires all release particles that embed in the lungs and cause mutations, illness and cancers. “For those who live in homes that use fires for warmth and cooking, it is essential that they use smoke-free coal as that will help reduce the risks and increase health.”

There are also some causes that are out of most people’s control - genetics and previous bouts of cancer. 

Muller says there is some research into how lung cancer could be hereditary based on specific genetic markers, but currently it is in the early stages and more studies are needed to prove it definitively. 

Unfortunately, for those who have undergone chemo or radiation therapy, the risk of lung cancer is increased. Some chemo drugs also cause scarring to form in the lung tissue or abnormalities.