Durban - After dumping piles of rubbish on the M4 on Monday that caused disruptions to traffic flow, a group of disgruntled refuse collection subcontractors have vowed to intensify their protests until they receive what they say they are owed by the eThekwini ­municipality.
The businessmen who are subcontracted to remove refuse in uMlazi and other townships claim they have not been paid for the past two months. 

However the city last week said it had paid for “all the work verified”, adding that the issue of the payment of subcontractors fell outside its scope as it had to do with the relationship between the main contractors and their subcontractors.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Before heading for the M4, the group of about 40 people, comprising both subcontractors and their employees, descended on Moses Mabhida Stadium with trucks and bakkies laden with black ­refuse bags filled with rubbish that had apparently been collected in uMlazi.
Also read: Waste removal contractors demand meeting with city manager over non-payment

They demanded an audience with city manager Sipho Nzuza, who was due to attend an unrelated meeting at the stadium.

Police both from the metro police department and the SAPS were called in to keep an eye on the situation, and the group later left and dumped the plastic bags on the M4.

Metro police spokesperson Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad said the disruption to traffic had been minor. 

“When we got the call one of our members was already at the scene. He had been travelling in the opposite direction and saw this, and turned around. There were no arrests,” he said.

The leader of the Delangokubona Business Forum, Bhamuza Mnyandu, said about 78 subcontractors working in uMlazi township had not been paid.

“Rubbish will not be collected, it has not been for the past two weeks, the situation is bad and can only get worse if the contractors are not paid,” ­Mnyandu said.

One of the subcontractors, who asked not to be named, said there had been attempts to address the non-payment issues. About three months ago there was a meeting with ­municipal mayor Zandile Gumede and Nzuza.

“The mayor spoke very well, she said since this was not a political issue but ­rather a strict payment issue we should not come to her with it, and she assigned the city manager as the person who we should engage with. We have been trying to contact the city manager but he is not answering our calls, and that is why we decided to go to the Moses Mabhida Stadium, but he is still not engaging with us,” he said.

The waste removal contract has been mired in controversy, and on at least two occasions since the beginning of the year the subcontractors have downed tools due to not being paid.

Attempts by the city to deploy permanent Durban Solid Waste (DSW) staff to continue the service in the townships has also proved ineffective as some staff members were allegedly attacked and even held hostage last week in uMlazi.

The controversial contract, awarded to four main contractors, was approved in December last year and a total of R45million was budgeted for it. However, this was soon depleted as some of the contractors were allegedly over-billing the city, a claim they have denied.

Towards the end of last month, DSW approached the city’s executive committee (Exco) asking for the value of the contract to be increased to R130m (excluding VAT).

This meant that the city had to find an additional R90m to fund the shortfall. At the time DSW said the original R45m budget estimate had been based on the contract running for three months, however, the Bid Adjudication Committee had approved the contract to run for six months, without the cost being adjusted. 

The municipality reiterated last night that the issue of subcontractors not being paid “fell outside of the scope of eThekwini” as this was a relationship between the main contractors and subcontractors.

The city confirmed that there were disruptions in refuse collection in uMlazi due to the payment issue and said a meeting had been convened yesterday to discuss the matter.

It said it would be attempting to provide services in uMlazi using internal ­resources with law enforcement deployed to the affected areas.
The Mercury