As thousands of people will be descending on the Jonsson Kings Park Stadium precinct for the Durban SPAR Women’s 10/5km Challenge on Sunday, June 24, participants and supporters are reminded to plan their route to the race, as there are a number of road closures that will affect access into the area, as well as to be mindful of where to park.

“We would like to encourage participants and supporters to leave home early so that they can arrive well in time to get into their starting positions,” says Race Director Brad Glasspoole.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The 10km race starts on Sunday, June 24 at 08:00 and the 5km at 09:30 on Masabalala Yengwa Avenue, outside Jonsson Kings Park Stadium.


Road Closures on Sunday, 24 June 2018


From 02:00

Snell Parade between Athlone Drive and the main entrance to Suncoast Casino.

Battery Beach Road.

Masabalala Yengwa Avenue between Smiso Nkwanyana Road and Isaiah Ntshangase Road.

The South bound lane of Masabalala Yengwa Avenue between Smiso Nkwanyana Road and KE Masinga Road.

Kingsmead Way Eden Gardens Crescent 

From 04:00 

KE Masinga Road (the 2 left lanes) between Eden Gardens Crescent and Masabalala Yengwa Avenue. 

Masabalala Yengwa Avenue between Argyle Road and Smiso Nkwanyana Road Somtseu Road at Masabalala Yengwa Avenue 

From 06:00 

The West bound lane of Athlone Drive between Snell Parade and Masabalala Yengwa Avenue

The off ramp from the M4 (Ruth First Highway) to Athlone Drive (in both directions)


ROAD OPENINGS


Roads will be opened as soon as possible after the last competitor has left that portion of the route and the cleaning team has ensured that there is no litter.

Most roads will be reopened by 11:30.


ACCESS


Access and egress to the Durban Country Club will be from the M4 (Ruth First Highway) Please note that Isaiah Ntshangase Road will be closed at (1) the entrance to Moses Mabhida Stadium and the entrance to Durban Country Club. There will be no through traffic at this intersection.

Access to the parking area at Sunkist Beach will be by way of a stop/go system managed by Durban Metro Police. 

Access to the Parking on Jonsson Kings Park fields KP3,4 and 5 will be via Smiso Nkwanyana Road into Jacko Jackson Drive. Note - once this area is full access will be limited to emergency and official vehicles only. 

Access to the Parking on Jonsson Kings Park fields KP9 will be via Umgeni Road into Isaiah Ntshangase (Walter Gilbert) Road / Virgin Active Parking area. Note - once this area is full access will be limited to emergency and official vehicles only. 

Recommended access to People's Park will be via Somtseu Road (Sasol Service Station near the station) and past Durmail using the back gate. 

Manual registration takes place on June 22 from 10am to 5pm and on June 23 at 10am to 3pm at Hall 6 at the Durban Exhibition Centre.

 For more information go to www.sparwomensrace.co.za or like the Facebook page.