Durban - As our nation celebrates the birth centenary of Nelson Mandela, Durban's heritage hub, Mitchell Park Trust, ventures into new educational terrain by launching a monthly Durban Book Fair on July 1. 
Dr Sanil Singh, Mitchell Park Trust Chairperson said: "It was Madiba who taught us that education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world." 
He added that they were bringing books into the park to encourage reading among the over 50 000 children who visit the zoo and the park every year. 
The book fair will take place every first Sunday of the month and is a partnership with #HashtagBooks. 
"Proceeds from the hire of the stalls by booksellers and artists will be a welcome addition to our coffers," said Singh. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Other participants will include the Hurley Centre's Bookseller of Mzansi and the Wentworth Book Club. 
The Hurley Centre programme encourages homeless people to earn an income from selling books that come in as donations from the public. 
The book fair will also be a platform to promote local writers and storytelling with prominent storyteller Mama Nomusa Xaba as its launch drawcard. 
Sunday will have a special carnival atmosphere with the fundraising day focused on the newly established education centre. 
Visitors are encouraged to meet another centenarian, Admiral the Seychellois tortoise who was left at the zoo by a soldier at the beginning of the  First World War. 
His owner never returned and Mitchell Park has been his home ever since. 
The Madiba theme will dominate the fundraising day with visitors encouraged to wear Madiba masks and of course his iconic printed shirts. 
The mask project is called "Face to Face with Madiba".  
Singh said that they wanted to make it an extra special July day as homage to the statesman's memory in the run up to his birthday on the 18th.  
Both young and old are encouraged to download and colour the cut-out masks off www.hashtagbooks.co.za  and from selected publications. #HashtagBooks has also put up cash prizes for the most outstanding masks worn in the park on Sunday.