Durban - Shack dwellers movement Abahlali baseMjondolo has been granted a court order to allow residents of a Lamontville transit camp back into their corrugated iron homes.
The order for restoration of possession was granted in the Durban High Court on Monday.

This comes after 47 families were evicted from their homes in Barcelona 2 by the eThekwini municipality’s anti-land invasion unit on Friday. 

Abahlali said the unit was accompanied by “heavily armed security guards” who they claim shot rubber bullets at residents. 

But the municipality said the residents who had been evicted had been illegally occupying the transit camp.

Resident Zoleka Jali said there was a list used when the evictions were decided on. 

“Last month they came saying they are going to give us new house numbers. They asked for handover letters, and those who did not have them had their ID numbers taken.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

These handover letters were what authorised residents to occupy a specific house. 

Jali said municipal workers threatened to return to remove those without these letters, but when they did, the community protested. 

“They came again on Friday without notice and with most people at work,” she said. 

The padlocks on houses that were locked were broken and belongings were thrown out, she said. 

While Abahlali said the 592 unit transit camp was built to hide impoverishment and homelessness of informal ­settlements in Lamontville during the 2010 soccer World Cup, acting city spokesperson Mandla Nsele disputed this. 

“Lamontville township has been earmarked for a ministerial housing upgrade project that is intended to benefit households in the surrounding informal settlements, namely being Barcelona, Walter Sisulu and Ekuthuleni. 

“The plan was to relocate them to completed housing units in the ministerial housing upgrade project and to surrounding Greenfields projects in the city.”

Regarding why these residents had been “in transit” for a decade, Nsele said the length of a stay in a transit facility could not be determined as it was dependent on the provision of bulk services and the construction of houses in the earmarked project areas.

Abahlali said the anti-land invasion unit had been accompanied by “heavily armed security guards”, who they claim shot rubber bullets at residents. They cried foul over the “illegal and violent eviction” - as there had been no court order.

But Nsele said those evicted had occupied the transit camp illegally and lacked the necessary documentation to allow them to live in the units.

Jali said other residents were allowed occupation in place of those who had been evicted, but the community protested and the new occupants had left. 

“Those houses were standing empty after people were moved to RDP houses. As our families grew we occupied those houses,” she said. 

But Nsele said the camp was used to rotate families while upgrades are taking place in informal settlements in the township. 

“The illegal occupants are attempting to queue-jump in the housing allocation process in order to receive free houses,” he said. 

The municipality was not represented in court, and as they had not been updated on the order, they could not comment on it, Nsele said.
The Mercury