Durban - A Durban broadcaster has been fired by his community radio station after establishing a political party that was set to contest the national elections next year. 
Alex Mdunge, a former Imbokodo FM broadcaster, introduced his new political party, the South African People’s Movement (SAPM) at the weekend in Morningside, Durban.
Members of the media were invited to the launch of the event.  
Imbokodo FM’s Sandile Ngema told Isolezwe, the Daily News’ sister paper, that the broadcaster decided to release him because radio regulations did not allow broadcasters to be involved with political parties.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Ngema said upon learning of the launch of the political party, they had no choice but to release him and thanked Mdunge for this contributions to the radio station. 
Ngema said that ICASA would not allow the station to have a political activist on it’s book. 
Mdunge reportedly said he understood the reasons behind his dismissal.
“I knew that this is not allowed, but I was waiting for the right time to inform my managers and thank them for giving me this platform. I wanted to prepare for my future before informing them that I will be leaving, but they called me first and made the announcement,” he reportedly said. 
Mdunge is not the first broadcaster to be involved with politics. 
In 2014, popular Ukhozi FM radio DJ Zimiphi "Zimdollar" Biyela, resigned as a broadcaster when she joined the National Freedom party (NFP) ahead of the general elections. 
She did not last long in politics and resigned from her political positions to make a swift return to Ukhozi FM by October 2015. 
"I have decided to stay away from politics and follow my career in broadcasting. I don't wish to speak about my past. I'm a new person now. I hope my fans will be happy to hear my voice again. Politics are my past and I will never quit radio because it's something that I was born to do," she reportedly told the Daily Sun at the time. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Biyela is currently an on-air personality on Ukhozi FM, where she contributes to three shows.
Daily News