Durban - Preliminary investigations into a Kwa­Zulu-Natal old age home that has been operating without electricity or food, have found gross abuse of government funding and pensioners’ grants. 
The results of the investigation will form part of Premier Willies Mchunu’s report to the provincial executive council, following his visit to the Elonwabeni Old Age Home in Kokstad on Monday. 
Mchunu’s spokesperson Thami Ngidi said yesterday the visit came after the council received a concerning report on the state of affairs at the home last week. The report was from the Department of Social Development.
“The provisional findings from an investigation by the Department of Social Development paints a very bleak picture. There was mismanagement of funds to an extent that the elderly people living there had to rely on donated food. 
“The money seems to have vanished into thin air. Even the R1000 they were paying from their grants was being swiped for things other than the needs of the home,” he said. 

Social Development referred a request for comment to the premier’s office. 
Ngidi said the department’s proposal to close down the facility did not go down well with the children of the residents, so the provincial government needed to make a decision on a way forward that ensured the elderly were not moved or left destitute. 
Cyprian Nyembezi, whose aunt lives at the facility, said this was the only old age home in the district and closing it would mean relatives would not be able to visit or keep an eye on their loved ones. 
He said the problems at the home came to light when some of the residents died. 

He claimed there was no money to bury them and that they were meant to have had funeral cover paid for through the home’s management from their grant cards. 
“It was found that funeral cover had lapsed because the service providers had not been paid for months. 
“In November last year my brother and I had to approach business people and individuals to donate food because there was none for the elderly. 
“While we could afford to buy food for our aunt, what about the other people? We could not only make sure our aunt was fed, and leave it.”

Since then Nyembezi has taken up the issue. “There is currently no management, no board. According to their constitution, there are supposed to be at least five board members, but the last board had three members who were the signatories for all money,” he said.
Salaries have also not been paid for months, leaving the about 44 staff members out of pocket, but they have stayed on to care for the residents.
To have the “desperate plight” of elderly residents “urgently expedited”, DA spokesperson on Social Development Sharon Hoosen and Chief Whip in the KZN Legislature Francois Rodgers had written to the South African Human Rights Commission. 
The Mercury