Durban - Respected National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) board chairman Sizwe Nxasana had failed to turn the fortunes of the institution around, the South African Union of Students (Saus) said on Monday. 
Saus is campaigning for the dissolution of the current NSFAS board under Nxasana after a string of problems that saw thousands of students not receiving their funds, dating back to 2016.
These included the inability of NSFAS - which is central in the government’s drive to provide free education - to distribute student allowances to its beneficiaries, eight months into the academic year.
Yesterday, Saus secretary-general Lwandile Mtsolo accused both the board and its ­executive management of starving scores of poor students, who had already been accepted by NSFAS, through recklessness and incompetence.
“We are talking about more than 20000 people who are not receiving meal allowances. You cannot stay in university without sustenance for seven months.

“By the look of things, there is no political will from the NSFAS board and the chief executive to fix these issues. The department has released the money to NSFAS, and it is failing to distribute,” Mtsolo said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
At the heart of the crisis at NSFAS is the “student-centred model” of allocating funds to students, which has effectively taken away the role of universities, as students now have to apply directly to the NSFAS head office in Cape Town, and not at their respective universities.
Addressing the national executive meeting of Saus on Sunday, Higher Education Minister Naledi Pandor criticised the NSFAS leadership for centralising the distribution of student funding.
“The way in which the student-centred model was implemented was wrong. You cannot parachute in and apply online, and the financial aid office on the campus does not know. There has to be a connection,” Pandor said.

She has ordered the embattled scheme to halt student applications for next year and only process them once it has sorted out its current backlogs from 2016, last year and this year.
“I’m going to put a support team in place to make sure they address the issues, and my team is going to ensure that we get to the bottom of what the problem is,” she said.
At the University of Venda, in Limpopo, the fight for allowances led to a violent protest, with demonstrating students clashing with police.
QuestionsAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

NSFAS spokesperson Kagisho Mamabolo did not reply to questions by the time of publication.
Last week, the scheme pointed out that it would not distribute allowances to students who had failed to sign their NSFAS Bursary Agreements (NBA) by the closing date of July31, despite more than 70000 first-time students who had not yet signed, and 29610 whose registration data had only recently been received.
“It is important to emphasise that moving forward disbursements will only be done for students who have signed, noting that senior students who qualified for renewal will automatically be generated for payment,” NSFAS said.
Mtsolo said Nxasana had failed the scheme.

“He is the chairperson of the NSFAS board and he has failed to turn the institution around. Students cannot eat his CV. He presided over the centralisation of the system and it is failing now.
THE MERCURY 
“When you move everything away to Cape Town and you are not ready in terms of the set-up, that is reckless,” Mtsolo said.