Durban - The Department of Education in KwaZulu-Natal says it is probing the circumstances around the death of a 17-year-old Chatsworth Secondary pupil who hanged himself with his school tie after he was involved in an altercation with the principal.
Matthew Joash David, a Grade11 pupil, was allegedly shouted at by the principal in a meeting with his mother on July 31.
Education department spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said the department, via the area’s circuit manager, has been liaising with the family and the school.
“The department is now on a fact-finding mission on what transpired. Once we have all the facts, we will take it further. 
Related ArticlesPsychologists expected to visit Chatsworth school“We sympathise with the family and assure them that once all the facts are gathered, we will take the necessary steps,” he said. 

Matthew’s mother, Judy David, described her son as a quiet and soft-hearted child, saying he remained silent on the way home from school that afternoon before he committed suicide. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
David said the principal accused her son of taking drugs and smoking. He was called a pervert and labelled as gay.
“I went with Matthew to school to fetch his report but when we got there, we had to wait for about two hours until the principal saw us. While we were seated outside the office, another teacher insulted Matthew and told him he was wasting his time at school and was useless,” David said. 
During the meeting with the principal, David said her son was accused of being a pervert for entering the girl’s lavatories and was called gay for the way he had styled his hair. 

She said her son was told he should not return to school and was referred to see a social worker in the area. 
“My son was crying and begging the principal to allow him back at school. He even put his hands together and begged for a second chance, but the principal didn’t want to hear it,” David said. 
On their way home, David said her son ran ahead of her to get home and when she arrived at their flat she found it locked and her dog frantically running around in the house.
“I knew something was wrong and that was when I screamed for help. My neighbour used a ladder and got in. He cut Matthew down before letting me into the flat.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Our family is devastated. My grandchild has nightmares and wakes up in the middle of the night calling for Matthew,” David said.
She said the family had not been in contact with the school since and they were disappointed that the school did not check up on them after the incident. 
The community marched to the school last week where they handed over a memorandum demanding that the principal be dismissed.
The DA made an unannounced visit to the school on Wednesday but the principal was not available to speak to them. 

They will be returning to the school on Thursday. 
DA MPL and education spokesperson Dr Rishigen Viranna said the claims regarding the school management’s conduct were extremely disturbing. 
“If true, they are a severe indictment for which they must be held fully accountable,” he said.
Viranna said the DA would report their findings to both KZN Education MEC, Mthandeni Dlungwane and Education portfolio committee chairperson Linda Hlongwa-Madlala in the interests of swift intervention.

The Mercury