Durban - Members of the provincial government came under fire for absenteeism after many missed a special sitting in the legislature this week.
The sitting was scheduled to debate and vote on several bill amendments that are on deadline, and are due to be submitted to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP).
The deputy speaker of the legislature, Meshack Radebe, who chaired the meeting, raised the concerns about absenteeism after reading out more than 10 apologies from absent members.
Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane and MEC Mxolisi Kaunda of Transport, Community Safety and Liaison were the only two MPLs present. They were later joined by Premier Willies Mchunu.
Radebe said it was not acceptable that so many members had not arrived. 

“This is not right; I would ask that all the parties address this,” he said.
The main chamber looked dire, with empty rows of chairs. 
Radebe later told The Mercury that the level of absenteeism had embarrassed the legislature. 
“If you looked up at the gallery, it was packed with members of the public, and yet the chamber was almost half empty.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Although this was a special sitting, I chaired the last sitting and I informed the members about this next sitting, and therefore in such an instance, the members should have cleared their diaries so they could be here.
“I had a doctor’s appointment that had been scheduled for 11am, but I knew that I needed to be here, and so I rescheduled the meeting for after 5pm,” he said.
Hadebe added that while ­absenteeism had not been a common occurrence, he was noticing it as the end of this term drew near. 
“This is supposed to be a period where we all work very hard so that the members who come in next term will find things have been done.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The legislature is the highest institution in the province and it should be respected,” he said.
ANC members objected to the characterisation from the DA that the chamber was empty. 
“What do you see in here? These are people, not chairs,” said one ANC MP.
There were nervous moments as the House tried to pass the Public Service Commission Amendment Bill, and it looked as though it could not form a quorum, with the Speakers demanding that those who had stepped outside must return.

DA leader Zwakele Mncwango said the legislature should start scrutinising the attendance register.
“We are supposed to be here, attending to community needs. It’s not like the legislature is convened every day, we only meet about once a month. The absence is the same as stealing taxpayers’ money.” 
The Mercury