Durban - The Kranskop farmer accused of desecrating graves has described the allegations as a concerted effort to vilify him and force him off his land. 
Carl Gathmann recently clashed with the Sgedlana community. 
On Monday last week, the residents blocked the R74 road and set fire to farm property. 
An emergency meeting had to be called to quell the tensions and another meeting is scheduled for Tuesday.
The MEC for Agriculture, Themba Mthembu, visited the area last week. He said he found graves that had been desecrated. 

“We are taking this matter very seriously and we will be bringing in the Department of Land Reform and Rural Development, the police, the Human Rights Commission, and we will be coming back here to see how we can resolve this,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Gathmann in his statement had said “It seems clear to me, based on the evidence that I see and my experience on the ground, that the issue of grave sites has been misrepresented by political opportunists in a concerted effort to vilify myself and my family business.
Intolerable
“The events of Monday night (last week), when my farm manager’s home was petrol-bombed repeatedly and 30 odd fires were set throughout the property and rocks were thrown, are violent and intolerable.

“The intent was clearly to harm myself, my family and my employees. As far as I can tell, the contention has nothing to do with graves and everything to do with affecting the dispossession of our property,” he said. 
Gathmann called for calm and for people and the media not to rush to judgement and believe he could be so disrespectful of others as to believe he could desecrate graves and get away with it. 
“I have consistently made efforts on my farm to deal with the remains of the dead with respect and care, and also to treat the living with utmost dignity,” he said. 
Community members said they were eagerly waiting for the meeting tomorrow and hoped a more “lasting solution” would be found. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I fear that should a solution be deemed unsatisfactory by the community members, this could lead to further turmoil in the area,” said ward councillor Mbangiseni Yengwa.
“I do not want to assume what the community will deem an ‘acceptable solution’ but it’s clear that the return of the land to the ‘owners’ is what they want,” he said. 
“The tone of some suggest they wish the farmer could be disposed of the land but the law does not work that way.” 
Community leader Skhumbuzo Zondi said: “The community feels it is best to put a distance between themselves and the farmer because this relationship has been poor for a long time. 

 “If that meeting does not produce any tangible solution, the community will go back to protesting,” he said.
The Mercury