Durban - Two men wrongfully arrested for rape and robbery in oThongathi in 2006 were awarded more than R3.6million each for damages after they spent more than six years in jail at Westville Prison.
The men, who were not named in the court judgment, sued the Minister of Police, Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, National Director of Public Prosecutions and Director of Public Prosecutions for KZN for damages in the Pietermaritzburg High Court. 
According to Judge Rishi Seegobin, all defendants admitted liability and offered to pay the men a settlement amount of more than R3.8m. However, the men rejected the amount and chose to take the matter to trial. 
Judge Seegobin said, from the time of their arrest, both were subjected to the “most humiliating, degrading and dehumanising treatment at the hands of the police”.
“This took the form of severe assaults, first at their respective places of residence and thereafter in the sugar-cane fields at Buffelsdale,” the judgment said. 

Both men had given painful testimonies of their experiences during arrest and incarceration. According to their statements detailed in the judgment, the men were arrested in the middle of the night and taken to sugar cane fields where the barrel of a gun was placed in one plaintiff’s mouth with a threat that he would be shot. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
It was also here that a police dog was set on him. Even though he ­received treatment at Osindisweni Hospital for his dog bite injuries, the plaintiff claimed this treatment was carried out without any anaesthetic.
“The assaults on both plaintiffs continued throughout their detention in the cells at the police stations concerned. While their request to be transferred to Westville Prison was acceded to, the conditions to which they were subjected at Westville were nothing short of appalling,” the judge said.
In their testimonies, the men said the prison’s cells were overcrowded with 40 to 60 inmates housed in a single cell, which were filthy, unhygienic and infested with lice and cockroaches. The cells had only 20 beds so some had to sleep on the floor on thin mattresses. 

They were each subjected to the added indignity of using the open toilet and shower in the cell.
Both plaintiffs said they became victims of gangsterism and had to contend with the constant threat of assaults and reprisals.
The judge said both plaintiffs lost the opportunity to establish meaningful relationships with their children who were quite young when they were detained and also suffered the pain and anguish of not being allowed to bury loved ones who died while they were in jail.
Both plaintiffs were about 25 years old when they were detained and were 32 when they were released. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Six years and 11 months is indeed a long time to be deprived of one’s liberty and personal freedom. It is also a long time to be deprived of an opportunity to establish a career, to strengthen personal relationships and in general to create a sense of self-worth and well-being,” Judge Seegobin said. 
The two men were also ordered that they pay a portion of the defendants’ legal costs as they ran that risk when they decided to take the matter to trial instead of accepting the defendants’ offer.
The defendants did not respond to queries at the time of publishing. 
The Mercury