Durban - ANC KwaZulu-Natal deputy chairperson Michael Mabu­ya­khulu has launched a scathing attack on civil rights group Freedom Under Law (FUL), saying the organisation was in cahoots with opposition parties to unseat the ruling party.
Addressing hundreds of delegates at the party’s provincial election workshop in Durban on Sunday, Mabuyakhulu also accused political analysts and the media of conducting a destructive campaign against the ANC. 
“Right wing non-government organisations such as Freedom Under Law are using the courts to usurp and question every decision of a democratically elected government. Our courts have become ­another site of political battle,” Mabuyakhulu said.
Among the board members of FUL are Struggle stalwarts such as advocate George Bizos (SC) and retired Constitutional Court Justice Zak Yacoob. Its chairperson is retired Constitutional Court Justice Johann Kriegler, who is also involved with the Nelson Mandela Children’s Fund.
The two-day workshop, which ends this afternoon, marks the beginning of the party’s campaign to win over voters in the party’s biggest province. 

Mabuyakhulu also accused AfriForum of creating a private prosecution wing that operated as a parallel structure to the National Prosecuting Authority.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Mabuyakhulu said local and international investors were also part of the campaign to dethrone the party by threatening to withdraw their investment whenever the ANC wanted to implement its resolutions.
“The intention here is to ensure that they destroy the trust that our people have in the institution of the state so that the ANC can eventually be toppled from power,” said Mabuyakhulu. Kriegler hit back at Mabuyakhulu, saying he was maliciously misleading the public by labelling FUL as a right wing organisation.
“We are not involved in politics. We are involved in breaches of the Constitution by people who exercise power by virtue of the Constitution.

“We have never lost a single case. We are bringing the attention of the courts to those instances where people are not doing their duties. To call us right wing is either ignorant or malicious,” said Kriegler.
The Mercury