Durban - The owner of Mclaren Circus says that all animal entertainment events, including horse racing, should be shut down if his circus is shut down for ­including animals in its acts.
Protesters led by Ban Animal Trading gathered outside the Mclaren Circus tent in Queensburgh at the weekend, armed with placards calling for animals to be banned in circus activities.
About three small groups of activists were stationed outside the Ridley Park site on Sunday to peacefully protest against the use of wild and ­domestic animals in the circus. 
This protest was the eighth of its kind in the province since June. 
Circus owner Dave Mclaren said that animals used in his performances were not abused, as had been alleged by some protesters, but were trained to perform their acts. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Animal cruelty is a criminal offence, and that is not how I treat my animals. If they are saying that animals should not be used for entertainment, then animals should also not be used in movies. Those ­animals are trained to act in the movie,” he said. 
Mclaren said he was “highly frustrated” with some protesters who spoke out against his circus, but had never seen his show or how he treated his animals. 
“My animals are so pampered. They all receive veterinary care, eat the best food, are kept clean and are so well looked after,” Mclaren said.
He added that although some protesters alleged his animals were living under harsh conditions, his animals were inspected weekly by the SPCA. 

Durban pupil and animal rights activist Sitara Thaver joined the silent protests on Sunday to tell Mclaren Circus that it was not welcome in her neighbourhood. Thaver handed out pamphlets saying: “Animals do not choose to perform and will not do tricks on command, every single day. They only do this ­because they have no choice and are afraid of what will happen if they don’t perform.”
Speaking to The Mercury, Thaver’s mother Jurie said: “Raising children to be kind to animals and to fight for their rights will ensure they grow up to be compassionate.”
Tara Aberdee, the provincial representative of Ban Animal Trading, said using animals in circuses was not ­educational and did not aid conservation. 
“Seeing a lion jump through a hoop teaches children nothing,” she said. “If the circus stopped using animals and started incorporating more talented human acts, then we would be the first to support them.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Mercury