Durban - African National Congress Youth League provincial secretary, Thanduxolo Sabela, has slammed detractors of the health department’s Cuba medical training programme. Sabela was talking at the official send-off of 206 fourth and fifth year medical students who left South Africa earlier this week after being on holiday from July. 

Sabela said they have received reports from members of Parliament about the programme to be cut off as part of cost cutting measures. 
He said they will continue to support the programme. He further reinforced the League’s support KZN Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, in the initiative. 
“Here, we had black children who come from deep rural areas, who are actually going to become doctors. It’s a proud moment for us as the Youth League. It makes us proud to be South African, and to be members of the ANC, when the ANC is doing such good things in society,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The department’s acting head, Dr Musa Gumede, echoed Sabela’s call for medical doctors to advance themselves. 

“They need to become medical students. Some of the challenges faced by the department are as a result of historical failure by some to design specialised training programmes that respond to the country’s health needs,” he said. 
Gumede said it was important for doctors to specialise. 
“They need to understand the country’s needs and then determine numbers to they are able to build capacity. We would not have had these challenges if the country’s needs were understood,” he said.
Dr Gumede said the department’s relationship with medical schools has been drastically improved, which has made engagement with academic institutions much easier.

MEC Dhlomo thanked the ANCYL and YCL for its support of the programme, and urged the Cuba-bound students to focus on their studies so that they can make their families and communities proud.
Addressing the students, he said: “There’s a lot of pressure on you to go back and complete your studies. You must come back and wipe away the tears from your families, and be good citizens who are able to contribute economically, and uplift your families. Help your mothers build homes, and get a good socio-economic status in your families, before you can even come up and help us as doctors. You must look forward to going back, because young must come back after completing your studies and break the chain of poverty at home, but also contribute in improving our health systems I look up to you as the brightest of them all. I did medicine myself, but always had my family around me. Whenever there were challenges, I always had my family to help me navigate my challenges. But you are far from your parents, and have to make do with whatever little that you have. So, we urge you to work hard, and make sure you use existing channels to communicate whatever difficulties you might encounter.”
 AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads