Durban - A proposal to spend millions of rands on projects supported by the eThekwini mayor’s office has been slammed as an attempt to “market” Zandile Gumede using ratepayers’ money.
But the mayor’s spokesperson Mthunzi Gumede said the accusation of “self-promotion” was unfounded.
A report tabled before the executive committee this week showed the mayor’s office would spend close to R97 million over the next three years on a variety of projects under the mayor’s parlour. 
Opposition parties criticised the spending, lack of details on the projects and the amounts to be spent, saying the way in which the figures were rounded up was suspicious.
The report showed that over the next three years, the city will spend a combined R3.1m on the “we are responsible young people campaign”; R3.5m on the mayoral youth Izimbizo; R4.2m on the youth month commemoration; R1.4m on the young people in art talent search show; about R2.7m on real estate training for young people; R1.2m on youth council; and R900000 to visit a women’s prison.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

There are 29 mayoral projects in total.
The report states that the strategic objectives of the spending are to ensure that the mayor fulfils her responsibilities, which extend well beyond officiating at council meetings or other municipal proceedings.
“And includes providing leadership, promoting positive relationships, and modelling good governance.”
It said addressing the marginalisation of the youth was one of the city’s key priorities.

“Although there has been great political and economic transformation in South Africa, many factors still make it difficult for the youth to achieve their potential. 
“The office of the mayor, through the youth office, has programmes designed to empower the youth of the eThekwini region,” said the report. 
DA councillor Heinz De Boer said some of the projects did not make sense. 
“One of the projects is going to visit a women’s prison. We could just jump in the car and go to Westville (prison) if we need to. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We know that it’s that time of the year and the elections are coming up, all these projects seem to be about one thing, and that is promoting the brand of Mayor Zandile Gumede,” he said. 
IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said his party was not happy with the amount to be spent on these projects. 
“We feel that there are items there that are not important and could be removed to reduce the figure. 
“We feel that the amount is too much.” 

The mayor’s spokesperson said: “These are annual projects done through the mayor’s office and not just by the mayor personally. They are not about self-promotion but about reaching out to different constituencies.” 
The Mercury