Durban - The provincial Department of Education has backtracked on its plan to take over the pupil transport function from the Transport Department.
The department recently told members of the education portfolio committee in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature that it did not have the capacity to manage the function and was handing it back to the Transport Department permanently.
The transport function, which assisted pupils living far from their schools, looked to be heading for trouble a few months ago after senior education managers admitted there was a shortfall amounting to hundreds of millions of rand, which was needed to properly deliver the pupil transport plan.
“We know the department was initially scheduled to take over the function in May, but it failed, and reached some agreement that Transport ­continue with the function for another three months until July.
“At a portfolio committee recently, the Education Department told the committee members it did not have the capacity to handle the function and was therefore giving it back to Transport,” said DA MPL and spokesperson on education Rishigen Viranna. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We found this to be annoying because we had already told them when they tried to take over this function that they did not have the capacity. They do not have the money to fund it and do not have the policy in place to manage it. 
“This is going to impact on the children who desperately need this function.
“There is still the issue of the schools in Nquthu where the department was ordered by the courts to provide transport; they still do not know where the money for that function is going to come from,” added Viranna. 
Another committee mem- ber, Thembeni Madlopha- Mthethwa, of the IFP, said they were not happy with the decision and felt the Education Department was better placed to manage it. 

“We are not happy because the service that was being offered by the Department of Transport is not up to the standard we want. 
“We have always insisted we want the ­Department of Education to take over this function.”
She said there would be a meeting between the members of the education portfolio committee and the Transport ­Department.
Education Department spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said: “The decision to move the function back to Transport was taken at a cabinet level. We still have a directorate that will be communicating on this function with Transport ­because it is not possible that we will not be involved. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The only change is that the funding and the administration of the function will now be under the Department of Transport,” added Mlotshwa. 
He said the changes would not affect pupils, and that one of the department’s core functions was to ensure they were well looked after.
Equal Education deputy general secretary Ntuthuzo Ndzomo said they had received the report on the matter on Tuesday and were in the process of reviewing it. 
The Mercury