Cape Town - Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi wants to reconcile with the ANC so badly that he gets angry when ruling party MPs mock him about it in Parliament.
On Sunday Buthelezi, who will be turning 90 on August 27, said he had even instructed Energy Minister Jeff Radebe to stop ANC MPs from making jokes about him still being unable to rejoin Africa’s oldest liberation movement.
He was addressing hundreds of dignitaries who attended a thanksgiving event at the Durban Exhibition Centre to mark the beginning of his threefold birthday celebrations.
The main event will take place in Ulundi on August 27, with international figures, including presidents and former presidents, invited to a gala dinner at the Durban International Convention Centre on August 31. “I wish that before the trumpet sounds, this matter should be closed.
Related ArticlesWATCH: Grand celebrations planned for IFP leader's 90th birthdayMangosuthu Buthelezi will be face of IFP for 2019 electionsMilestone bash for Mangosuthu Buthelezi plannedButhelezi birthday celebrations kick off with thanksgiving serviceWATCH: Grand celebrations planned for IFP leader's 90th birthdayMangosuthu Buthelezi will be face of IFP for 2019 electionsMilestone bash for Mangosuthu Buthelezi plannedButhelezi birthday celebrations kick off with thanksgiving service12“In Parliament I stopped them from coming to me to joke about this. I asked the Honourable Mr (Narend) Singh to convey this message to Mr Jeff Radebe, to say that, please, this is not a laughing matter as it needs to be closed,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Buthelezi said if the ANC wanted him to have a humble and peaceful death, his membership should be renewed.
He said he was humiliated and isolated by ANC leaders despite having formed the IFP with the blessing of former ANC president Oliver Tambo to continue the Struggle.
He said his crime was to oppose the armed struggle, international sanctions and disinvestment against the apartheid government.
Buthelezi said he was first isolated by former ANC secretary-general Alfred Nzo, even though he had pressured the National Party government that “under no circumstances am I prepared to talk unless Mr Mandela and other prisoners are released and exiles are returned”.

He said he was humiliated when former president Nelson Mandela avoided meeting him.
“When Mandela was released, he phoned to tell me that we will meet soon, but that soon never came,” Buthelezi said.
“Month after month passed until amakhosi (traditional leaders) in the Transkei asked him: “You and Buthelezi are so close... have you already met him?”
“He said: ‘No, because the leaders of the ANC and UDF almost throttled me,’” he said.

When they finally met in Durban on January 29, 1991, Mandela wanted the two of them to address the political violence in the province.
Bishops on Sunday praised Buthelezi for being a statesman who called for stability in Parliament when EFF MPs were causing chaos.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Arts and Culture, Bongi Sithole-Moloi, said the government had allocated R30million to upgrade Ulundi Airport in honour of Buthelezi.
“The government, in partnership with the Buthelezi History Museum, are ensuring that Buthelezi is not left out of leaders who contributed to the history of the province,” said Sithole-Moloi.

IFP chief whip Narend Singh said he understood Buthelezi to be talking about reconciliation between himself and the ANC, and this did not involve the IFP.
“There is unfinished business of reconciliation, as from Mandela’s day there was unfinished business.
“I think he means that all the lies about him need to be dealt with,” said Singh.
Political Bureau