Durban - The rogue waves that caused a boat to capsize, killing two KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board employees, are what may have saved two others as they pushed the vessel towards help on the shore.
Eric Buthelezi, 42, and S’qiniseko Ngobese, 34, told of the harrowing experience during what was supposed to be a routine shark net change in Richards Bay last week.
The bodies of skipper Richard Gumede, 43, and fellow crew member Mandlakayise Gumede, 45, were recovered. They are not related. The search for a fifth crew member, Siyabonga Gabela, is ongoing.
Speaking after the memorial service for Richard and Mandlakayise at the eThekwini Community Church on Thursday, Buthelezi said, as the skipper, Gumede had gone out to check the sea condition, as usual, before coming back to pick up the crew. But, as they went further out, the wind picked up.
“Richard decided to go back and change the last net and that’s when a big wave hit,” he said. “We all went under when the boat capsized but once the wave was passed, we all came up and I could see everyone. I was in a better position because I could see the waves coming and could brace myself and shout to the others,” said Buthelezi.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

But as the waves kept pelting them, fewer heads bobbed back up.
Ngobese had become entangled in the net but managed to hold on to one of the engines of the boat. “I was stuck to the boat, wherever the boat went, I went. When the waves kept coming and hitting it, it went under. I went under and got more and more entangled in the net. I was caught by my legs, arms, neck and head, it was basically covering my whole body.”
Buthelezi was able to swim so he could hold on to an engine himself.
“Luckily, when the waves hit, they pushed the boat towards the shore, we were out on the water for a long time but eventually the head of the lifeguards saw us and swam out. He cut me out of the net and that is how we survived,” said Ngobese.

Sharks Board chief executive Mthokozisi Radebe said this was the first such tragic incident in the organisation’s 54-year history.
He said this was especially painful for him, as he had been close to the men. “It goes beyond being a CEO or part of management, I worked with them and knew them personally,” he said.

 
 
   Richard Gumede’s father Jeremiah, wife Zinhle and chief executive of the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, Mthokozisi Radebe, at the emotional memorial service for the 43-year-old decorated skipper, and crew member Mandlakayise Gumede, who were killed in a tragic accident at Richards Bay last week. Picture: Zanele Zulu/African News Agency (ANA)
 


Radebe said Richard, who had worked for the Board for 18 years, was recognised for adherence to safety, with awards for eight years running.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Since he started working at the Sharks Board, he has worked at this beach (Richard’s Bay) so he knew it very well,” said Radebe.
“Taking Richard’s experience (into consideration), his awards for safety, the comparatively safe launch, as well as the kind of man he was, you cannot describe this as anything other than a freak accident,” said Radebe.
Gabela had started working at the board as a security guard and was so drawn to the work of the board, he joined the crew less than three years ago.
Mxolisi Kaunda, acting MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, said Richard and Mandlayise’s funerals would be at the weekend.

Kaunda warned workers of the board, who resumed a strike, against using the tragedy to cast aspersions on the board.
“We urge striking members to respect the dignity of the deceased. We also urge them to respect the rights of those workers that are not on strike.”
The Mercury