DURBAN - A deputy principal of Margate Middle School is being investigated for allegedly using a dead teacher’s qualifications to land senior posts in the Department of Education.
Sindiswa Base is alleged to have taken over the qualifications of Nonkanyiso Ophelia Fumba who died in 2011 of natural causes, said her family.
They confirmed her death and said they were aware Base had been using her qualifications because Margate police contacted them for a statement.
Fumba’s brother-in-law, Xolile Njikija, said his family were concerned by how Base obtained his dead sister-in-laws qualifications, which included an advanced certificate in education and a national professional diploma in education, both from Rhodes University in 2008.

 
 
  A copy of a dead teacher’s certificate.
 

Rhodes University spokesperson Veliswa Mhlope confirmed that the qualifications were legitimate. Base’s matric certificate submitted to the education department also allegedly belonged to Fumba.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We do not know who Base is as we had never heard of her prior to this investigation. I presume she could have been a friend of my sister-in-law.

“What she is doing is wrong. We have been fully co-operative and have handed over all death certificates, and marriage certificates to the police, along with our statements.”
Base is alleged to have used the qualifications to secure a job at Gabangezwa High School before landing a position at the Margate school. It is believed she started as a level one educator and was later promoted to deputy principal, allegedly with the help of the former governing body of the school.
A concerned parent, who did not want to be named, said he was aware of the matter and that it had been reported to the education department by parents in February.
“We have not heard anything from them regarding this. It is now an open secret. What is going on is very concerning and we hope the department will intervene soon,” he said.

Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said an inquiry had been opened at the Margate SAPS for further investigations.
“Once the investigation has been completed, the inquiry will be taken to the Public Prosecutor for a decision,” said Gwala.
Sihle Mlotshwa, spokesperson for the Department of Education, said it viewed the allegations as “extremely serious” and were investigating.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“This is all we can say about it at this stage. We cannot have someone teaching our pupils when they are not qualified or have submitted fake qualifications,” said Mlotshwa.

Earlier this week, the South African Council for Educators (Sace) said it was planning to hand over 19 cases of teachers allegedly using fake qualifications to the Hawks.
Sace spokesperson Themba Ndhlovu said teachers with fake qualifications had been undermining the profession.
“It is concerning that there is a possibility that many fraudulent qualifications may have already been used to secure jobs. The challenge now would be how we deal with teachers who already have jobs with fake qualifications.”
Base said she had no idea who Fumba was, and denied using the deceased woman’s qualifications. She knew nothing about an investigation.

“This is a made-up story and the first time I have heard about it.”
She said she had been a teacher since 1996, and studied at Umtata Technical College before completing a course in Adult Basic Education at Nelson Mandela University. “I became a deputy prin- cipal three years ago and went through the proper processes.”
 nabeelah.shaikh@inl.co.za
SUNDAY TRIBUNE