Durban - A Durban teacher who resigned on Monday amid allegations that she had used the k-word in class may soon face criminal charges as parents of the affected children have vowed to take action.
Pupils of the Westville Girls’ High School Grade 10 class claimed that the English teacher used the k-word to refer to black people whom she accused of wanting to take land that was legitimately owned by whites.
Enraged parents who spoke to The Mercury last night vowed they would not let the matter go and were even planning to approach the Human Rights Commission.
During her rant, according to one pupil, the teacher allegedly said her parents in the Midlands now sleep with guns under their pillows because “k*****s” want to take land from whites.
This was corroborated by another parent, Mfanozelwe Shozi, the deputy chair- person of the Commission on Gender Equality, whose child was among those in the class when the alleged racist incident took place.

“She allegedly said that Zimbabwe, when it was called Rhodesia, was one of the best countries in Africa but now is a hopeless case under African leadership. She said that South Africa will end up in the same state as Zimbabwe if African people take land from white people.
“In the midst of her presentation she referred to African people in the derogatory term k*****s,” said Shozi.
The details were related to Shozi by his daughter.
Another parent, Malusi Mhlongo, was preparing to consult other parents with a view to laying criminal charges against the teacher, whose name is known to The Mercury.

“I will be talking to other parents and gathering enough information to lay crimen injuria charges against her. I am willing to go as far as the Human Rights Commission,” said Mhlongo, who is also the deputy head of eThekwini Municipality’s legal affairs unit.
The EFF, whose leader Julius Malema was said to be the main target of most of the teacher’s invective, also weighed in on the issue, saying the party would do all in its power to ensure that the teacher wasn’t allowed to set a foot in any classroom.
“We are not surprised that there are people like this. In fact, this shows that they are multiplying. That she resigned, it is not enough. We want her to suffer the same fate as Vicki Momberg and Penny Sparrow. We want to ensure that she is not allowed to teach anywhere else,” said Vusi Khoza, an EFF member of the KZN legislature.
The teacher had allegedly told the pupils that EFF leader Malema is the person she hates the most and that she would kill him should they ever cross paths.

In a letter sent to parents which was also posted on Facebook, school principal Catherine Raw confirmed the incident.
She said online that one of the teachers had made racist remarks and shared her biased view of the South African political situation.
Raw said in the letter that she was made aware of the incident on Thursday night and an investigation into the matter started on Friday. 
“The teacher requested an opportunity to apologise to the class. It was pointed out to her that this did not alter the investigation process,” Raw said.

The teacher subsequently resigned on Monday while the investigation was under way.
“Please be assured that an individual teacher’s racist comments and bigoted view of the South African political landscape is not one shared by the school.”
Shozi said he was satisfied with the manner in which the school had handled the incident. 
“I went to the school on Monday and by then the principal had started to investigate the matter and they were also interviewing the black pupils. The children have also received counselling,” he said.

KZN Department of Education spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said his department would contact the school to establish more facts.
“We have to find our own facts which means we’ll have to meet all the stakeholders so that we get to the bottom of this.” 
Mthethwa said that MEC Mthandeni Dlungwana hated racism with a passion and would not allow pupils to be reminded about apartheid.
The teacher could not be reached for comment.

The Mercury