A woman employed by the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) was shot dead in an altercation after a child was knocked down and killed near Greytown.
The woman was a passenger in the vehicle that had hit 9-year-old Msizi Mchunu from Jangeni Primary school.
He was knocked and killed outside his school in Ngome, Msinga, near Greytown on Friday.
Thembelihle Mkhize, 38, and a male colleague who was driving the vehicle had been travelling from Pietermaritzburg for work when the accident happened. The pair stopped to offer assistance when they were confronted by Msizi’s close relative and residents. 
The relative accused them of driving recklessly, and allegedly pulled out his firearm.

The driver of the vehicle managed to flee, but Mkhize was shot dead.
Ward councillor Lungisani Ntuli said yesterday he was still trying to make sense of both the shooting and how the child had been knocked down. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“I was travelling to Pietermaritzburg when I was informed by members of my ward committee that a child had been knocked down. Then I received a second call that a close relative of the child had shot a woman dead. 
“They said that when the relative arrived at the scene, they asked who the driver was. Some people pointed to the woman because it seemed the driver had fled,” he said. 

Ntuli questioned how the accident had happened as there were speed humps along the road. 
“The child was knocked down close to his school. That road has several schools, there are several speed bumps. I think there are about four sets of them. 
The KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Cogta, Nomusa Dube-Ncube, said the incident was a “horrible tragedy”. 
“It is with a heavy heart that we express our condolences to the family of the child who was killed during a road accident involving our departmental vehicle. In the same breath, we condemn the murder of one of our staff members following this accident.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Words cannot describe how one feels when one thinks of the loss endured by those who have just lost a child to an accident. But words also fail one to think that another person could be murdered in retaliation,” she said. 
Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said a case of culpable homicide and murder had been opened.
The Mercury