Durban - Kranskop community members went on the rampage on Tuesday, setting a farm manager’s house on fire after accusing the farm owner of desecrating the graves of their forefathers.
The graves, belonging to community members in the Sgedlane area, were allegedly levelled about two weeks ago.
While protesting, the community temporarily closed the R74 road connecting Kranskop to Greytown.
In the early hours of Tuesday, they set the farmhouse on fire but the flames were quickly put out, saving the house from being completely gutted.
A guardhouse at a golf course, a shed and an open field were also set alight by the angry mob who were baying for the farm owner’s blood.

When the The Mercury’s sister newspaper, Isolezwe, arrived at the farm, the shed was still on fire and the community had camped out on the R74.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Yesterday’s violence led to an emergency meeting between the farmer, the local chief and community members. Another urgent meeting has been scheduled for the coming week at the Kranskop police station.
Residents claimed the tension between the community and the farmer, Carl Gathmann, who owns Mehlemamba farm, started about two years ago when he removed about 16 families from the farm.
Contacted for comment yesterday, Gathmann said he would issue a full press statement on the matter today.

“This grave thing is devoid off all truth, the issue is land,” he said.
The community members, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of victimisation, said they had decided to burn the farm so the farmer would leave the area.
“We are tired of waiting on government structures to address the situation. We do not see any progress with what they do, they come and write things down and say they are going to report to their superiors, and after that, it’s just silence.
“It has been years that we have been complaining about this situation, we are yet to get any assistance and that is why we have taken the decision to chase the farmer away. We have had enough of this, this land belongs to the people, if the farmer cannot live with the people, he must leave,” said a community member.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Hope
Another community member, John Zondi, said the community had lost hope, as every time they opened a case with the police nothing happened.
“There is no other life we know than living on a farm, that is why we have had to bear this painful situation, but this has become intolerable. Gathmann grew up on this farm, he knows about the graves and yet today he is levelling them with a tractor,” said Zondi.
Community leader Skhumbuzo Zondi said the community had had enough. “He levelled the graves totally and was continuing to plant over them. When the community discovered what had happened, they got angry.

“This is not the first time we have had challenges with the farmer. Besides forcing us from the land, he constructed a road that runs through a primary school playground so children have nowhere to play. The road was unnecessary.”
He said during the meeting the farmer had denied levelling the graves. “We want the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to explain to us what is the status of this land, because a land claim was lodged in this area ages ago,” said Zondi.
Ward councillor Mbangiseni Yengwa said, “If the government is serious about the expropriation of land without compensation, this is the first farm that should be expropriated in KwaZulu-Natal.
“This farmer has been very hostile towards the local community, even when we speak of bringing development to this area we have to grovel before him for permission. He won’t allow for electricity or toilets for the community to be installed on that farm,” said Yengwa.

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said about 300 protesters had blocked the road, complaining about a farmer who had destroyed the cemetery on the Aussicht farm road.
“The road was closed as bottles were broken and placed on the road. POP (Public Order Policing units), RTI (Road Traffic Inspectorate) and Greytown police members went to monitor the situation and clear the road,” she said.
The Mercury