DURBAN - FORMER President Jacob Zuma’s brother and Duduzane’s uncle, Khanya Zuma has slammed former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas’ testimony at the State Capture Commission of Inquiry.
Jonas told the commission on Friday that he was offered R600 million by a Gupta brother in return for favours if he was promoted as minister of finance. 
Jonas told the commission he rejected the alleged bribe. He alleged that the meeting which took place at the Gupta family's Saxonwold compound in Johannesburg in October 2015 was arranged by Zuma's son, Duduzane. 
Businessman Fana Hlongwane was also present, he told the commission.
Reacting to Jonas’s testimony, an infuriated Khanya, 73, asked why Jonas didn't open a case with the police.
“Why did he not open a case (with the police) if he believes my nephew is guilty of something. I am not defending my nephew because I am not privy to what exactly happened, but one would assume that if someone of Jonas’ stature finds himself in the situation he claims he was in, the first point of contact is the police. However, I stand to be corrected,” said Khanya.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

  
  
   Former president Jacob Zuma's brother, Khanya Zuma. 
  
 
Jonas told the commission it was not easy to trust anyone within the criminal justice system at the time, as the state institutions were in crisis under Zuma’s reign. Jonas had also testified before the commission, which is headed by deputy chief justice Raymond Zondo, that the Gupta brothers had said they controlled state institutions including the police, the Hawks, intelligence and the NPA.

Instead, he opted to write a statement exposing state capture allegedly by Gupta family. Jonas said the Gupta family member threatened to kill him if he told anyone about the meeting where he was allegedly offered a bribe.
The commission was set up to probe allegations of state capture. 
Khanya accused Jonas of using the Zuma family name to settle political scores.
He said it angered him that the Zuma family was constantly under attack even though his brother was no longer president. 
Zuma resigned in February amid mounting pressure for him to leave the Union Buildings, with President Cyril Ramaphosa taking over until next year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“I thought this hatred towards my family would go away when my brother resigned but it has worsened,” said Khanya.
Khanya, who described Duduzane as a “humble and handsome boy” said they met in July during Duduzane’s brother Vusi Nhlakanipho’s funeral. The funeral was held in Johannesburg.
“He came to Nkandla (Zuma’s homestead) and we chatted about life, but it was nothing serious. He is really a lovely boy,” he said.
The inquiry resumes on Monday.
SUNDAY TRIBUNE