DURBAN - The newly launched Mazibuye African Congress took aim at the ANC and IFP over their stance on land during their policy workshop which ended on Monday in Richmond.
The new political party says it will contest the general elections next year. The Mazibuye African Congress (MAC), is not affiliated with the anti-Indian Mazibuye African Forum, MAC president Reggie Ngcobo said. 
Ngcobo said the party had national membership estimated at 35 000 and said it was formally launched in July where the mandate to contest elections was taken. He said the North West province was currently where the party enjoyed the most supporters as branches were operational and active, he said.
In a post-workshop statement, Ngcobo said there was currently confusion in the political spectrum and described the governing ANC as “drunk in confusion” over land.
The new political party supports land expropriation without compensation, but wants the land to be under the custody of traditional chiefs (Amakhosi) and for title deeds to be scrapped. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“They (the ANC) are being opportunistic of very sensitive issues that include the land expropriation without compensation that they were formed 106 years ago to address. They further applauded the consultative meeting around amendment of section 25 of the constitution which is an insult to the intelligence of our native people.
“We are deeply disappointed by the stance taken by the once firm and credible IFP on expropriation of land with compensation, this leaves a lot to be desired. We hope that one day we shall have an opportunity to understand their anti-African native stance,” he said.
Ngcobo said they did not fundamentally agree with the IFP’s stance that farm owners be compensated, because the land was stolen, he said.
“We are left confused by some aspects of the IFP’s stance, but we believe we may need to sit down with the IFP and understand what their stance really is and talk to them as people who are senior,” he said. 
As part of Mazibuye’s policy resolutions, they said the chiefs must form the fourth arm of the state and foreign industries must employ locals and capacitate them.
Ngcobo said the party was not a splinter group of the ANC, as members were from many different parties, he said. 
“Our secretary general Romeo Matjila is from the DA North West for instance, our treasurer Brian Kwana is from ADeC, and I am from the ANC where I was an activist in the past three years, but I have been with the EFF as well in the past,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mazibuye group are also calling for the reserve bank and mines to be nationalised.
DAILY NEWS