Durban - Young jazz composer, Riley Giandhari, received a R70 000 cash prize as runner-up in the Jazz category at the SAMRO Overseas Scholarships competition which took place in Johannesburg recently. 

 The 23-year-old from Queensburgh, South of Durban,  received the prize for his composition titled Answer the Call, which was inspired by the feeling of annoyance from an incessantly ringing cellphone in a restaurant.
 “After being shortlisted as a finalist, as well as being recognised as a jazz composer, I feel that my dreams are becoming more real. I have learnt so much from being a part of such a prestigious competition and this has motivated me and inspired me to write more music,” said Giandhari.
 Giandhari also received the Surendran Reddy clazz award with a cash component of R10,000 for blending elements of different music styles in the spirit of the late South African composer and pianist.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 “I am honoured to have received the Surendran Reddy clazz award as my music is all about fusing elements from different music genres,” he said.

 The current UKZN masters student said he is excited for the future because the competition has given him exposure as a composer and he is going to put the prize money to good use.
 “I’ve  wanted to record my music for a while and this will be easier knowing that I have the funding to do so,” Giandhari said.
 Not only does Giandhari work as a  part-time Kearsney College music teacher but he also gives drum lessons and has bands who perform for corporate events.
 Giandhari said he hopes to expand his music by collaborating with other musicians, dancers and rappers in future.

 The composers advice to other young aspiring musicians is to “be yourself “ and stay “true to your craft.”
 “Respect all styles of music and respect other musicians. There will never be another you, so embrace yourself as a unique individual. Always show love in whatever you do,” he added.
 The SAMRO Overseas Scholarship winners are University of Cape Town graduate, Andrew Hoole and current UCT student, Conrad Asman.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 Each winner walked away with a R200 000 scholarship from the SAMRO Foundation to further their postgraduate studies, or professional development, abroad.

 Asman also won the clazz award in the Western Art Music category and received R10,000. 
The Mercury