Durban - Homeless Durban bookseller Kagiso Phihlela’s dream of furthering his education has received a boost after he was contacted by Management College of Southern Africa (Mancosa) with a generous offer.
On Monday, The Mercury published a story about Phihlela, who left his family in Limpopo and travelled to Durban in April with the hope of finding a job to pay for his Postgraduate Certificate in Education at Mancosa.
But Phihlela, who has a BCom Accountancy degree from the University of Limpopo, could not find work and ended up on the streets.

Related ArticlesHomeless man’s bookish determination to studyHe was then introduced to the Bookseller of Mzansi initiative at the Denis Hurley Centre.

The initiative aims to train homeless people as booksellers to “connect people who want books with people who sell books”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Phihlela said he was trying to sell books to raise the registration fees to register at Mancosa.
After reading about Phihlela, Mancosa offered to help him.
Professor Zaheer Hamid, Mancosa’s academic director, said Mancosa recognised his potential. 

“In keeping with the institutional values of creating opportunity and developing people, Mancosa has provided Phihlela with a registration scholarship, allowing him to pursue his educational dreams. 
“Mancosa awards deserving and capable students scholarships, and wishes Kagiso Phihlela well in his pursuit of advancing his education and realising his goals,” said Hamid.
Phihlela said he was overwhelmed with gratitude. 
“When I got there (to Mancosa) they offered to pay my registration. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“They said they may offer me a job tutoring ­accounting, since I have a degree, and they will pay me daily in order to fund my studies,” Phihlela said.
Phihlela said he was very “happy and thankful to God” for bringing generous people into his life.
In addition to Mancosa’s offer, two other people called Phihlela to offer him help, one of whom has offered him a bookkeeping job.
The Mercury