Durban - A 35-year-old security guard, who is believed to be linked to the Colenso taxi massacre in which 12 people were shot dead, has been granted bail of R5000.
The man appeared amid tight security in the Durban Regional Court yesterday with at least five armed Tactical Response Team police officers standing in the public gallery and manning the doors.
The man - whose name the court has ordered not to be released - was arrested two days after 11 people, associated with the Ivory Park Taxi Association in Gauteng, were gunned down.
A twelfth person died in hospital, and five others survived.
They were coming from a funeral in Greytown when the taxi they were travelling in, on the R74 between Colenso and Weenen, was shot at, leaving it riddled with more than 250 bullets holes.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Following the mass shooting, National Police Commissioner Lieutenant-General Khehla Sitole announced a 72-hour action plan - including a manhunt by a special task team, including crime intelligence, the Hawks, detectives and the Special Task Force.
Police have remained mum on the arrest of the man, who is currently charged only with unlawful possession of ammunition, after he was found with 73 live rounds of AK47 ammunition.
State prosecutor Nosipho Gumede told the court that police had acted on information when they went to search the man’s residence in Sydenham. The ammunition was found under his bed.
Ballistics

She said police were still awaiting a report on ballistics tests.
She said the State was not opposed to bail but brought to the court’s attention that the man may be needed in court for another case.
Although she did not specify which case, the charge sheet states that the man may be linked to the Colenso matter.
In an affidavit, read out by his private attorney Nolwazi Malimela, the court heard that the man was a security guard who works at a Durban mall, earning R2900 a month.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said he could only afford R2000 bail with the help of his family. He has no previous convictions or pending cases.
He was granted bail and ordered to report to the police station near his home once a week, until November 8, when he is due back in court.
Meanwhile, one person died in hospital after sustaining a gunshot wound in an exchange between police and residents in Colenso yesterday.
Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said rioting, which appeared to be over service delivery problems, started on Sunday night.

“Disgruntled residents went on a rampage, closing the R74 between Colenso and Weenen, with rocks. When police attempted to open the road they were stoned and shot at.”
Mbhele said police vehicles were damaged and a construction vehicle was set alight. The group then went on to hijack a truck which was then looted of its load and used to block off the road, said Mbhele. “When officers responded, they were met with gunfire and were forced to retaliate,” she said.
Colenso police are investigating an inquest in connection with the shooting, as well as cases of public violence and malicious damage to property, said Mbhele.
THE MERCURY