Durban - The SA Red Cross Air Mercy Services (AMS) has been praised for their contribution to saving countless lives over the past two decades.

Speaking at an event held to honour the anniversary, KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, hailed the team for their work in providing services to people in far-flung areas of the province.
He described the partnership between the department and AMS as a valuable one, adding that it has gone a long way to save lives.
Dhlomo welcomed the recent establishment of a mobile medical training simulator unit, which is funded by the National Lotteries Commission (NLC).
This road-based unit provides a cost effective learning platform for medical personnel to be trained in the field of Emergency Medical Services. It makes training more accessible to staff working in the rural areas, creating opportunities for career growth, capacity building, and skills development, ensuring the efficient and equitable utilisation of the air ambulance service.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Dhlomo said KZN is an extremely mountainous and vast province.
“To travel from Kokstad to Durban, for instance, is about four and half hours. It’s the same with Manguzi to Durban. If you had to have a patient in Manguzi or Kokstad who has been examined and the doctors are saying he or she has poly-trauma, which means several critical injuries and bleeding, that patient can’t be assisted in a distant area. That patient needs to be connected to the machines, put in ICU, on a ventilator and receive more blood. That can only be done at a bigger hospital like Albert Luthuli,” he said.
Dhlomo added that the advanced technology allowed the department to treat patients who would have otherwise died.
“The beneficiaries aren’t just the department of health, but the citizens of KZN.  It is going to cause less panic for people to know that even if, God forbid, I were to get into an accident in Nongoma, UMhlabuyalingana and Kokstad, I am safe because this department is able to send this helicopter with this advanced technology to pick me up from there, and within 30 minutes I’m at Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital,” he said.

Dhlomo said the department of the mandate is to ensure “A Long and Healthy Life for All South Africans”.
AMS CEO, Dr Phillip Erasmus, said that, in line with creating access to health care for all communities and strengthening the national health system, the programme is growing to include all fraternities of medicine so that even the most marginalised communities in the more peripheral areas can enjoy the same health benefits as citizens in urban settings.
“Aside from the thousands of indigent communities that are afforded specialist support in their hometowns, the local health practitioners are being supported and capacitated to develop with the support of their senior counterparts who visit from the urban centres. The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health has invested a lot into this programme and the dividends are clearly being seen,” Erasmus said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 

AMS facts


 Since June 1998, the AMS has been providing emergency air ambulance services from two bases, in Durban and Richards Bay, to the length and breadth of the province.
 To date 384 504 patients have benefitted from the AMS helicopter and fixed air wing, with 64 220 medical personnel benefitting from training and capacity building sessions held at health facilities, including those in the deep rural areas.
 This aero-medical service currently has two dedicated outreach aircraft and a ground outreach vehicle and supports more than 40 health facilities in KZN.



Daily News