Durban - ANC members stormed a council meeting in the Msunduzi Municipality yesterday, demanding the resignation of the city’s deputy mayor, Thobani Zuma.
They have accused Zuma of being a divisive figure in the council and among ANC members in the Moses Mabhida region.
Speculation is rife that Zuma was “the politician” implicated in the audio clips in which suspended municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe was recorded allegedly fixing council jobs on behalf of “the politician”.
Hadebe was placed on precautionary suspension by the council last week and an investigation has been launched.
The protesters demonstrated outside the council and later stormed the meeting. They carried placards stating “Thobani Zuma must go” and “Thobani Zuma has looted the city”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Some of the placards alleged he had built himself a R9 million house through corrupt means.
Former ANC councillor Sibusiso Mkhize, who was among the protesters, said they did not want Zuma present as the ANC prepared for the polls.
“We do not want the ANC to face any stench as we go to the elections and would, therefore, want the deputy mayor removed. Our main problem with him is that he is busy interfering with the work of the administration.
“There are two clips where he is implicated in interfering with the process of employing workers in the municipality.

“He is the head of infrastructure in the city, but the roads inside the city centre have potholes, we have electricity problems, yet he is failing to address those challenges. He is busy interfering with recruitment and issuing of tenders.
“He is dividing the ANC members and dividing the ANC councillors. I am a former councillor, so I know exactly what I am talking about,” said Mkhize.
Zuma said he would not comment on the issue. “I am not allowed to speak to the media, irrespective of the nature of the allegations. The only people who can speak are the mayor or the secretary of the region.”
Attempts to speak to the Moses Mabhida region secretary, the mayor and the speaker were unsuccessful.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said they had written to the speaker demanding she takes action against Zuma after the audio clips emerged. “The responsibility to deal with the councillors falls on Speaker Jabu Ngubo.”
IFP leader Thinasonke Ntombela described the matter as concerning, saying the aggrieved ANC members who stormed the council meeting had information that opposition members did not have.
THE MERCURY