Cape Town - Benjamin Franklin once said: "Wine is constant proof that God loves us and loves to see us happy", something all wine-lovers can happily attest to. 
 

 On World Pinot Noir Day - a day which celebrates the dark-coloured grape variants known as the "most romantic of wines", we take a look at just some of the iconic references to wine in recent cinema, TV and music history.
  

 
  (Because: wine not?)
 
 
  
 
 
  It's become one of the most recognisable lines in movie history - and arguably one of the most disturbing. In the 1991 movie 
  Silence of the Lambs
  , Dr Hannibal "The Cannibal" Lectre utters the famous line: “A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti."
 
 
  
Chianti is produced in central Italy's Tuscany region, but in 2013, a US cinema chain, Alamo Drafthouse, released a series of Silence of the Lambs-inspired wines. (We're not quite sure just how well they pair with human liver, though.) 

    
   

UB40's Red, Red Wine is probably the most iconic and well-known of wine songs. 
The original, sang by crooner Neil Diamond, was given a Jamaican-rock do-over when the boys from UB40 reclaimed the song in the late-1980's and turned it into a wine-lover's anthem.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Isn't it ironic... that Alanis Morissette sings about “a black fly in your Chardonnay,” in her 1995 pop rock classic song, Ironic? 

    
   
And who could forget the catchy lyrics to 2001's Lady Marmalade, in which Lil’ Kim, Christina Aguilera, Mya, Pink and Missy Elliot belt out: “Boy drank all that magnolia wine..." and "We drink wine with diamonds in the glass.”

    
   
The hit TV show Will and Grace featured the character of the fabulous Karen Walker, who made no qualms about her penchant for boxed wine. Classy!

 
 
  
   
  
Similarly, Eddie and Patsy's preferred tipple of choice - wine (and copious amounts of it), saw the Absolutely Fabulous duo become the poster women for day drinking to an entire generation. 

   
  
But it's ultimately Paul Giamatti’s single, throwaway line – “I am not drinking f@*!ing merlot!” in the 2004 movie sideways, which is probably the most significant pop culture reference when it comes to all things wine. 

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  Not only did sales for merlot drop significantly following the movie's releases, but it resulted in a positive boost in pinot sales across the US.
 

 

 We'll drink to that!

 

 @capetimes

 

 ctnews@inl.co.za

 

 Cape Times