Durban - One of the leaders of the Twelve Apostles Church in Christ says the site, where at least six members of the church were killed in a gruesome bus crash, was a dangerous stretch of road in Melmoth, in northern KwaZulu-Natal.
An 11-month-old baby, three women and a man were among the those killed when the driver lost control of the bus while navigating a bend on the R66 on Saturday night. 
The provincial transport department said a preliminary investigation revealed that the driver had lost control of the bus, which led it to overturn, killing five people instantly. The sixth victim succumbed to injuries at Ngwelezane Hospital at the weekend. 
The crash brought the number of people killed in KZN road accidents over the long weekend to at least 10.
The bus crash occurred as church congregants were travelling from Soweto to Mevamhlophe in Empangeni, near Richards Bay, to celebrate the church’s 40th anniversary. More than 80 000 congregants are said to have attended the celebrations in Empangeni on Sunday.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The national chairperson of the Twelve Apostles Church in Christ, Bonginkosi Dlamini, said he had visited the site on Sunday morning. 
“When I got there the area had been cleaned, but we could still see the remains of the wreckage.
“The police briefed us that as the driver was coming around the bend he lost control, and the bus rolled. Some of the people were thrown out and the bus landed on them, crushing them. 
“We understand there were more than 60 people in the bus, and about 18 were injured. About 12 people who had minor bruises have since been discharged and travelled to the church celebrations. 

“The MEC for Community Safety and Liaison (Mxolisi Kaunda) has organised transport for them to go back home,” he said. 
Dlamini said they had yet to get clarity on how the bus lost control. 
“But the Ndundulu bend where the driver lost control is very dangerous; a well-known traditional leader lost control of his vehicle and died at that bend. When I am driving there I can feel that it’s easy to lose control.” 
Kaunda, with the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube, and ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule went to the scene of the crash and visited the injured in hospital.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We are deeply saddened by this horrific crash and we have asked the police to speed up the investigation to establish what the cause of the crash was,” said Kaunda. 
IFP leader Blessed Gwala said those at fault must be held responsible. 
“Overloading and unroadworthy vehicles are becoming the norm,” he said.
ANC KZN spokesperson Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu passed on the party’s condolences to the families, friends and entire membership of the Twelve Apostles Church. 

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said a culpable homicide investigation would be opened.
In other accidents, tourists who were believed to be from the UK were involved in a head-on collision between two vehicles on Friday afternoon, on the N2 at the Zinkwazi Bridge in which three people died.
On Thursday, one person was killed and 13 injured in an accident near Umtentweni.