DURBAN - IN A pilot test case, Hajra Court in Overport has set the standard nationally for how buildings with defunct lifts may be tackled.
The block of flats, which for more than 30 years had been described as an “eyesore” on prime Overport land, had fallen into a state of disrepair, and residents of the five-floor building had no functioning lift. The cause for the deterioration of the building, according to the owners, was an “internal family dispute”.
Now, said Daniels Penta- saib, the eThekwini Municipality’s senior manager at the building inspectorate department, buildings countrywide could be tackled using the same approach as that of the block.
“A functioning lift in a building of this design and form is a requirement in terms of applicable legislation. I was tasked by the Department of Trade and Industry via the building control officer’s steering committee of SA to research relevant legislation that may be applied in this situation,” he said.
A notice in terms of the National Building Regulations was developed and served on the owners of the building, said Pentasaib, with the intention of approaching the Durban Magistrate’s Court for adjudication purposes, because the owners of the building had failed to maintain the functional design and purpose of the building, he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

While the city was preparing to take the matter to court, the owners had complied with the notice and remedial work at Hajra Court had started.
Pentasaib said a multi-disciplinary task team had been assembled to tackle problem buildings, and using the research and experience that went into Hajra Court, they would tackle other buildings with similar problems.
Compliance
“Municipalities around the country have adopted this methodology for compliance purposes. We have learnt what works and we know the challenges. Fortunately we now have the resources and model in place to tackle problems of this magnitude,” he said.

Dr Sayed Iqbal Mohamed, the chairperson of the Organisation of Civic Rights (OCR) and the deputy chairperson of the KZN Rental Housing Tribunal, said he had been handling tenants issues at Hajra Court for 30 years.
“It has been a long and challenging pilot case for both the OCR and eThekwini Municipality, but one that will provide hope to residents to take up non-functioning lifts with the municipality,” he said. “A municipality has the power to compel an owner to ensure a lift is operational after it is shut down by the Department of Labour or becomes dysfunctional.
“Residents, among them, the elderly, infirm and people with disabilities who live in high-rise buildings, have to endure tremendous hardships because of dysfunctional and non-functioning lifts.
“OCR has been campaigning and lobbying for 11 years to make lifts that are shut down for safety reasons, functional and operative within a specified period,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

AB Mohamed, one of the owners of Hajra Court, said the cause of the disrepair at the building had been because of a family dispute.
“Hajra Court is getting a R10-million upgrade and refurbishment in two stages. The first stage is the outer area and the second stage is the interior and ground space. A new R1m lift has been installed, to be operational at the end of August,” he said.
Residents did not want to speak to media.