Durban - The chief executive of the South African Institution of Civil Engineering (Saice), Manglin Pillay, has come under fire for saying girls were more predisposed to caring careers than to the fields of science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem), and that women did not occupy high-profile executive positions because they chose to dedicate their time to raising children.
Pillay made the remarks in an article published in the latest edition of Saice magazine - and also posted on his personal Facebook page.
The Facebook post was accompanied by a picture of a working woman carrying a baby who was pulling on the phone she was speaking on, ­depicting a struggle in balancing work and family.
The article has been shared several times on both Facebook and Twitter, with many questioning Pillay’s comments.
In the article, titled “Out on a rib”, Pillay addresses his piece to the women in civil engineering, and says “you know I am your friend”.

He states further that more men occupy high-profile executive positions because of their “appetite for workload and extreme performance requirements at that level, choosing what is important and where to allocate time”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“The time when graduates start progressing to middle management is about the same time that the ­majority of women wish to have families.
“In this phase, most women prefer to work part-time or to dedicate themselves completely to child rearing or pursuing other meaningful exploits generally related to caring,” he wrote.
Saice has since distanced itself from Pillay’s views, saying they in no way reflected the opinions of Saice’s membership. 

“The Saice executive board is horrified at the innuendo that girl-children are less capable in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics. 
"Maternal profiling in the article belongs in the past and not in the 21st century,” said Saice spokesperson Marie Ashpole.
Pillay also referenced a story about a female Passenger Rail Agency of SA engineer who said she found that she had to work twice as hard to prove herself. 
Pillay said he did not understand the “working twice as hard bit”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“What did she mean? Did she have to do the same job twice in comparison to a man? 
"Did it take twice as long to achieve the same outcome? What exactly was she saying - I was not being facetious. I really wanted to understand,” Pillay wrote.
He further discussed women being paid less than men in similar structures of the workplace, saying the data indicated the reasons ­behind that as being much more complicated than male dominance.
According to Pillay, life choices, age, work-life balance and potential growth all played a role in the manifestation of disproportion.

He said women’s “agreeableness” and motherly instincts prevented them from negotiating higher salaries. 
He concluded his article by raising the question of whether the country should invest more in attracting women to Stem careers, “given that money, time and resources are constrained”.
Ashpole said the picture that accompanied Pillay’s post on Facebook had a “derogatory feel”.
She added that the tone of the paragraph starting “To the women in civil engineering - you know I am your friend” was patronising ­towards women.

Ashpole said the board apologised for Pillay’s views being given a platform in the magazine, and said personal views that were opposed to what Saice embodied would never again be aired in any official Saice communication.
Deborah van Heerden of the Business Women’s Association of South Africa condemned Pillay’s comments, saying his views were “archaic and condescending”.
She said one of the hurdles faced by women in the ­engineering sector was their non-­inclusion into the “brotherhood”, adding that she believed some men felt threatened by women in the sector.
“There are many successful women in the engineering environment and they work just as long hours, manage their family lives and attend school functions. 

"When a woman says she works twice as hard it is because she is capable of filling the role of wife, mother, house-­maker and career woman successfully.
“We strive to encourage all women to become financially ­independent and make a difference in society and stand on their own two feet and know their self-worth,” Van Heerden added.
Women in Engineering also expressed outrage at the article, which it described as derogatory, condescending and patronising.
“It is these grossly disrespectful and misogynistic comments that Mr Pillay openly shares, using his leadership platform as chief executive of Saice, that remain one of the key reasons why women leave our profession. 

"To discount the contribution women have made to this sector is a grave injustice, and to reduce us only to caregivers is a travesty,” the group stated.
It added that for Saice to denounce Pillay’s comments was not enough, and they needed to rethink their choice of chief executive.
Pillay was approached for comment yesterday but referred The Mercury to Saice.
THE MERCURY