Durban - City mayor Zandile Gumede has issued a stern warning to politicians who use the issue of land for political gain, saying that she hoped those fuelling the invasions were ­arrested soon.
She said the city was “putting our foot down” on the continuous land invasions.
There were at least two at the weekend in Burlington Heights, near Queensburgh, and at the Silverglen Nature Reserve near Chatsworth. 
On Monday, residents of Burlington Heights blocked all access roads into the area, demanding they be granted permission to build homes on a vacant piece of land.
At the weekend, metro police had to intervene and extract members of the steering committee in that ward and a proportional representative (PR) councillor who was held hostage in a community hall.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The community said 18-year-old Siyanda Ndlovu was killed on Saturday, allegedly by the city’s security personnel. 
Ndlovu’s family denied that he had been part of the land invaders.
Gumede said members of eThekwini Municipality’s land invasion unit were attacked when they attempted to stop a group of people from invading land illegally in the Burlington area.
She told executive council members at a meeting in City Hall on Tuesday that a municipal employee from the Land Invasion Unit was shot while trying to execute his duties, and another official had been struck on the head by a rock. 

“Other officials sustained minor injuries and about three police vehicles were damaged. We strongly condemn the continuous activities of land invasion, whether it is private or public land, this has to stop. We wish our members a speedy recovery,” she said. 
The municipality has since opened a case of attempted murder with the police while an internal investigation will also be conducted by the municipality surrounding the circumstances of the incident.
“Land invasion is counter-revolutionary; it disrupts government plans of redistributing land. Some of the land that gets invaded is being claimed, therefore if you invade, you are equally stealing land from rightful owners,” she said.
Gumede assured that the land would be returned to the people in a legal and peaceful manner, saying thugs would never succeed in trying to “hijack the revolution”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We have confidence in our constitution and parliamentary process that seeks to deal with the land question,” Gumede said.
In Silverglen, on Sunday more than 100 land invaders had to be dispersed by the police and park rangers.
Land invasion into the reserve has been an ongoing problem.
Shaun Hammond, chairperson of the Silverglen Conservancy, said while the invaders’ attempts had been thwarted in Seven Tanks and the nature reserve, construction was continuing in Silverglen just on the border.

“This is still a D’MOSS (Durban Metropolitan Open Space System) area. Although this is not in the Silverglen Nature Reserve it is still an asset to the area and the environment. It’s a shame to lose conservation areas when we need as much green spaces as possible.”
The Mercury