DURBAN - The teenager accused of sexually assaulting a 5-year-old girl at the uMngeni Bird Park in June appeared in the Durban Magistrate’s Court this week where the matter was adjourned for further investigation.
The 17-year-old was part of a school holiday volunteer programme at the park when the incident allegedly took place.
According to the court charge sheet, it’s alleged that the 17-year-old persuaded the 5-year-old to pull her pants down and took pictures of her private parts, after which he allegedly fondled her private parts and made lewd suggestions.
The charge sheet stated that in court it came out that the child was duly assessed by probation officers with preliminary enquiry proceedings having taken place.
In a response sent to The Independent on Saturday, eThekwini Municipality said the volunteer programme had not been completely shut down and would resume after the finalisation of this matter.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The programme normally takes one or two volunteers at a time,” read the statement.
According to information from the City, reports received were that a family was hosting a birthday party at uMngeni River Bird Park, when one of the school holiday volunteers, the 17-year-old, allegedly lured two little girls towards an area of the park that was not open to the public.
As he was allegedly molesting one of the girls, the other one ran to alert the adults in the group.
After his arrest, the teen initially appeared in the Durban Magistrate’s Court on June 26 and the matter was adjourned to allow for an interview to be done with the victim as well as for further investigations. The accused, after his court appearance, was released into his parents’ custody.

Speaking on the teenager’s release, the director of the Centre for Child Law, Dr Ann Skelton, said the child justice act did aim to reduce detention when it came to child offenders, “but the court will consider a range of options before this is done.”
Skelton said the seriousness of the crime did have some weight on this decision and in this case, rape was considered as a schedule 3 offence, which fell under a serious crimes category.
“The court is, however, enjoined by the Constitution to use detention when it comes to child offenders as a last resort,” she said.
The court took a wide range of factors into consideration.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It looks at the stability of the family and whether the child is in school, whether there’s a chance they might run, as well as the seriousness of crime.
“With adults they often are granted bail while minors are released into the custody of their parents.”
She said that when deciding on sentence, the court has to look at reports compiled by probation officers and or social workers.
 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY