Durban -  South African Marriage Week, which begins on Friday encourages couples to invest in their marriages. 

 

 This initiative, which is taking place from September 1- 7 invites all married couples 
 across the country to stand up and support marriages in South Africa. 

 

 SAMW is a campaign 
 that was launched by INTIEM
  and it forms part of International Marriage Week 
 (www.marriage-weekinternational.com), which is celebrated globally.

 

 SA Marriage Week’s vision is to inspire and motivate couples to focus on the wellbeing of 
 their marriages, an effort which spills over to contributing to the wellbeing of their families 
 and as a result, helps establish healthy communities.
AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 

 “Our vision is perfectly encapsulated by the Chinese proverb that goes: ‘When there is love 
 in a marriage, there is harmony in the home; when there is harmony in the home, there is 
 contentment in the community; when there is contentment in the community, there is

 prosperity in the nation; when there is prosperity in the nation, there is peace in the world’,” 
 says Liezel van der Merwe, founder of SA Marriage Week and managing editor of INTIEM
 .

 

 “Our mission is to equip couples with the vision, knowledge, inspiration and motivation they 
 need to build happy and strong marriages.”

 

 This year’s theme for SA Marriage Week is: “Invest in your marriage.” 

 

 Liezel explains: “With 
 this theme, South African couples are encouraged to invest in the emotional, spiritual, 
 physical, financial and mental spheres of their marriages for a positive and sustainable

 outcome.

 

 More practical advice about this topic can be found on SA 
 Marriage Week’s website, www.samarriageweek.co.za.

 

 This non-profit initiative started in 2014 and goes together with an exciting campaign each 
 year. It forms part of International Marriage Week, which is celebrated in 19 countries 
 across the globe. 

 

 Anyone can register for free on the website to benefit from the wealth of 
 information, free tips, interactive games and much more.

 

 “It is also important to us that the holiness of marriage be celebrated during this week, 
 which is why a spiritual leader has been asked to get involved to pray for South African 
 marriages. We also encourage couples to pray for their marriages, especially during this 
 week, and to ask God to bless their unions,” says Liezel.

 

 Daily News