Durban - The Durban South Community Environmental Alliance is demanding answers from government following a fire that gutted a shoe-making factory in Jacobs, earlier this week. 

At around 4:46am on Wednesday, the emergency teams rushed to the scene at Jini Trading in Brooklyn Road to find the building well alight. Employees inside the factory managed to escape and no injuries were reported. A few houses in the vicinity of the factory were also damaged. 
Following the blaze, reports emerged the building may have been an illegal operation. 
Related ArticlesGallery: KZN factory burns to the groundRazed Jacobs shoe factory could have been an illegal operationAccording to the Department of Labour, they had issued a prohibition notice for non-compliance with the Occupational Health and Safety Act and Regulations in 2017.
Department spokesperson, Nhlanhla Khumalo, said this was after a joint inspection was conducted at the company. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said the Department of Labour issued a prohibition notice for non-compliance with the Occupational Health and Safety Act and Regulations. 
“To date, the prohibition notice was not revoked. It is possible that the company may have been operating illegally," Khumalo said. 
SDCEA’s Desmond Dsa said residents and businesses have had enough of the absence of local government officials with regard to flagrant violations of city bylaws by irresponsible companies. 
Commenting on the 2017 visit, Dsa said they found that there were lots of hazardous materials on the premises.

“There were no escape routes, all walkways were blocked and there were no safety or warning signs,” he said. 
Dsa added that residents whose homes bordered the factory often complained about the noise coming from the factory. 
“We want the local authorities to hold this company responsible for the effects of the fire on the people’s health and wellbeing. Residents are demanding that the health officials do a door to door health survey as well as on the damage to people’s homes, belongings and property,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Daily News