Durban - The uncle of slain Anni Hindocha said while articles of Shrien Dewani with his new love interest came as a shock, it was also a confirmation. 
 

 Speaking to IOL from Sweden, Ashok Hindocha, said that in the beginning, Shrien had denied being homosexual and then during court proceedings had admitted to being bisexual. 
AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 

 "But judging from the look of happiness with this man in the pictures, it seems Anni paid a heavy price for his happiness because Shrien could not have become homosexual overnight," said Ashok, who is the brother of Vinod Hindocha, Anni's father. 

 

 According to Mail Online, Dewani has been dating Brazilian photographer
  
 Gledison Lopez Martins and the couple has enjoyed a number of overseas holidays. Martins posted pictures of their trip to India in October 2017 on Instagram. 

 

 "He knew that he was homosexual. Why did he get married and spoil the life of a girl and cause all the suffering for her family?" questioned Hindocha.  

 

 "Anni paid a big price and her family are still suffering for it." 

 

 Anni, 28, was shot 8 years ago while on honeymoon in Cape Town. 

 

 She was killed on November 13, 2010, in a botched hijacking in 
 Gugulethu.

 

 And while three other men - 
  
 Zola Tongo, Xolile Mngeni and Mziwamadoda Qwabe - 
 have been convicted for her murder, her husband walked away scott
  free four years ago. 

 

 Hindocha said over the years there was an element of doubt pertaining to Shrien's sexuality. 

 

 "It was always a case of maybe, maybe not.  But those photos clearly portray that he should not have gotten married to Anni. Did he have pressure from his family? I'm sure they knew."

 

 Hindocha said from the time the article of Shrien's new love interest surfaced, Nilam, Anni's mother has been stressed. 

 

 "She was a mother who gave up her daughter to a man that she thought would care for her."

 

 He added that he would not be surprised if Shrien stayed in the same honeymoon suite as he did with Anni in India while on honeymoon.  

 

 DAILY NEWS