DURBAN - THE man who stands accused of killing university student Zolile Khumalo is expected to plead guilty to murder in court on Wednesday. 

Thabani Mzolo, 23, is expected to appear via video conference at the Durban Magistrates Court more than three months after the murder of the 21-year-old student.
Khumalo, a first-year quantity-surveying student at the Mangosuthu University of Technology, was a young woman from rural eShowe who harboured big dreams and wanted to relieve her family from poverty.
She was shot dead in May at her off-campus residence at the Durban CBD, allegedly, by her ex-lover, Mzolo, whom she had broken up with days prior.
Mzolo allegedly shot Khumalo twice, according to state prosecutor Calvin Govender, who said in court that Mzolo also kicked Khumalo’s limp body as she lay on the floor.

 
 
  Thabani Mzolo is expected to plead guilty to murder. Picture: ANA Archives
 

According to The Mercury, Mzolo will plead guilty to the allegations in court on Wednesday.
His attorney, Charl Claassen, said Mzolo handed him written instructions to “bring to the public’s knowledge, especially to the deceased’s family, that he’ll be pleading guilty to the murder of Zolile Khumalo”.
Claassen said Mzolo wished to convey that the motivation behind his decision was to provide the Khumalo family with closure.

Mzolo’s initial court appearances had been met with crowds of outraged students and political representatives who have called for an end to gender-based violence.
Last week, MUT erected a memorial fountain at the campus to honour Khumalo, and to affirm MUT’s stand against gender-based violence.
MUT Council Chairperson Morailane Morailane said they decided to erect the fountain to remind the institution how it failed Zolile and to help eradicate the scourge of gender-based violence in South Africa.
At the unveiling ceremony, Khumalo’s family spokesperson, Mabongi Myeni said: “We are glad that Zolile still lives in the heart of the university just like she still lives in our hearts. We are still on the pursuit of justice as we are going back to court on Wednesday to see justice for our daughter being served.”

SUNDAY TRIBUNE