Durban - Poor discipline among pupils and teachers, pupils going to school armed and drug abuse and dealing are just some of the problems that have plagued the Masakhaneni High School in KwaMakhutha Township, eManzimtoti, in recent months.
On Monday, Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane and the MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, Mxolisi Kaunda, visited the school following the killing of two pupils last Monday.
Grade 10 pupil Mangaliso Mbatha, 18, and Sihle Mngadi, 20, in Grade 11, had allegedly tried to separate pupils fighting over a cellphone when they were stabbed to death. 
The problems at the school were laid bare during the meeting between parents, pupils, teachers and the MECs.
Dlungwane told the concerned gathering that several “painful options” were being considered in a bid to restore stability at the school. 

These would include expelling defaulting pupils, or even closing the school down, if it proved necessary.
At the meeting it was also alleged that some pupils were embroiled in proxy wars between the school principal and some teachers. Dlungwane said is was inexcusable that some teachers were using children to fight for positions at the school.
“Teachers at this school have also had inappropriate relations with pupils,” he said.
In February this year, angry community members blocked about 24 teachers from going to the school, blaming them for the problems. 

The teachers then started reporting to the circuit office, and after negotiations 17 decided they would not return to the school because they no longer felt safe.
The teachers have also been accused of fanning disputes among pupils by demanding only pupils from KwaMakhutha study at Masakhaneni, and those from neighbouring Mthiyane be removed because they were allegedly responsible for the violence. 
Dlungwane lashed out at both the parents and pupils.
“One of the problems at this school is the lack of discipline among pupils. It is very low.

“The parents should play their role, it cannot be that a child leaves home armed. Parents should show interest in their children and be firm with them.”
He said he would communicate the action to be taken tomorrow. Pupils also vented their anger.
“We do not have teachers. We only have ‘training teachers’. There are some subject we haven’t tackled since February, and we are expected to write exams soon,” said one Grade12 pupil.”
Another said violence was common at the school. 

A parent said they had lost hope that the school would excel academically.
“This school is producing an army of whoonga addicts with no future. My children are in Grade 12. From what I have seen of their work, it is clear they are not learning ­anything,” she said.
The Mercury