Sarah Isaacs’s camera is her tool for connecting and celebrating the female spirit. Marchelle Abrahams chats to her about her new campaign
If pictures tell a thousand words, then her snapshots tell stories that are begging to be heard. They are the silent witnesses to the power of love and empathy prevailing over pain and sadness.
The Cape Town-born portrait and documentary photographer, who was shortlisted for a prestigious Travel Photographer of the Year award recently, embarked on a massive social media campaign at the beginning of 2018. 
Called Speaking Our Truth, she asked various women to come forward and share their own experiences of abuse, sexual assault and harassment - but not before sharing her own story in the hope it might encourage others to speak out.
The response she received was remarkable - 11 women chose to share their narratives - and allow themselves to be seen through Isaacs’s camera lens.

I wanted to get to know the woman behind the camera, so I asked her a series of questions about the Speaking Our Truth initiative and how she, unwittingly, became a warrior for feminism. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

How did you get into photography?
After a psychology degree and three years working in publishing, I left my job and threw all my savings into a solo trip through South America. During that time my camera was my only permanent buddy.

I wasn’t continuously snapping, but the knowledge that it was there made me see the world a little differently.
Bit by bit, the photographs became secondary as my desire to understand different human beings grew. This desire is what sparked my ongoing interest in photography. 

Your images provoke a certain emotion in them, is this your intention?AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

I think all photographers strive to invoke emotion with their work. No one is likely to be interested in what you have to say if it doesn’t make them feel something.
It’s the heart of being a photographer - failing countless more times than you succeed while hanging on, mostly by a thread, to the belief that you can create something worth looking at. 

Tell us a little bit more about Speaking Our Truth.

At the start of 2017, I fell unexpectedly in love with portraiture as a way of celebrating the everyday woman - imperfect and beautiful.
Then the #MeToo movement was born, and for the first time in my life I felt as though I was part of an army. I was emboldened by the women who stepped forward first, and saw a real opportunity to speak freely about a violation that (crazily!) I’ve always shouldered blame for. When I shared my story on social media and asked other women to step forward and do the same, my greatest fear was not slut-shaming or victim blaming. My greatest fear was that no one would step forward and stand alongside me. I respect deeply each of the women who did. 

You speak about your personal experience with your Speaking Our Truth campaign. Did you find it cathartic when shooting these women?

The short answer is yes, but it was not the life-changing shift I had anticipated and it was considerably more taxing than I’d prepared myself for. 
Once I’d processed each of the stories, and tried to capture the woman behind each one, I felt a sense of community and joint strength that is hard to describe.

How did you convince these women to come forward? It’s such a personal experience.

The decision by each woman to step forward and be seen was their own. No one needed cajoling or convincing. They put themselves courageously and knowingly on the line to create something that others might take notice of.
* Visit Sarah Isaacs Photography website http://sarahisaacsphotography.com and her Facebook page https://www.facebook.com/sarahisaacsphotography/ to find out more about Speaking Our Truth
 IOL