Durban - Former KwaZulu-Natal explorer and author Riaan Manser, who was the first person to circumnavigate the African continent on a bicycle and who rowed across the Atlantic from Africa to America, has invited one brave person to join him on his next expedition. 
Manser, 44, who grew up in Zululand in Richards Bay, circumnavigated the coast of Africa in two years and two months, travelling 37000km through 34 countries, many ranked among the most dangerous on Earth, and went on to become the first person to circumnavigate 5000km around Madagascar without any back-up assistance. He had to secure his own release during his African journey when he was imprisoned in Equatorial Guinea and captured by teenage rebels in Liberia.
He is also known for being the first person to circumnavigate Iceland, alone and unaided, in a kayak, in 2009. 
And it’s another trip on an ocean-rowing boat that Manser is offering to one lucky participant in a competition he recently launched to give back to society by making it possible for someone to join him on an adventure, all expenses paid. 
Manser’s first unaided trip across the Atlantic Ocean was with his then fiancée, now wife, Vasti Geldenhuys, when they rowed 11000km from Morocco to New York City in 2013.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Manser said he was keen to see people from his home province entering the competition to join him on the trip, which will follow a much shorter 5000km route from the Canary Islands to Barbados.
“I believe most people in KwaZulu-Natal are more adventurous than other people. KZN is a jungle and other provinces are either concrete or desert, whereas we have the jungles, warm waters and surf,” Manser said.
“I have had the opportunity and people have given me wonderful gifts of opportunity, although some people might say I made them happen, but I know people did good things for me on along the way. 
“I know what it takes financially and in planning and preparation to go across the ocean, and I want to make it possible for a South African who might never have that opportunity.”

Manser said the winner did not necessarily have to be super-fit because he would work with the person for a few months to get him or her into “reasonable shape” before heading off on the marathon row across the ocean in December.
“We were fit for mountain biking when we went on our trip across the Atlantic but we discovered that we were not so fit for rowing. We are going to work with whatever fitness levels they have got,” Manser said.
Judges will select the top 50 applicants who enter and 10 finalists will be sent to fitness boot camps in September to whittle down the numbers to get to the five top candidates. 
Manser will be producing a documentary of the trip for M-Net. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

His earlier, Icelandic journey featured on DStv’s Travel channel, while his row to the US appeared on Discovery Channel, and his Madagas- can adventure on M-Net’s Supersport. 
SMS “ROW” to 39400. Entries close on Thursday at 8pm.
The Mercury