Durban - University students who live in Durban’s off-campus residences and communes are under siege from criminals, with another student accommodation facility being robbed at the weekend.
The attack is the second in just a week, following another armed robbery at a student accommodation in Umbilo last week. 
The students living in a commune in Ritson Road near Berea were held up on Friday night and robbed of an undisclosed amount of money, five laptops and six cellphones. 
About eight students, including females, studying at a university close to Berea, live in the commune that was targeted. Two of the female students were not there at the time. 
“There were about three to four ‘clean-looking’ men, probably in their 20s, who held us up,” said a second-year student who lives in Ritson Road.

The student, who moved into the commune this year, refused to be named for security reasons. 
“The crime issue is something that we had not been paying close attention to. Our commune is very busy, with people going in and out. On that night we had not locked the gate because most of us were not asleep.
“They came in at about 10pm. They started by assaulting a security guard and then forced their way into the commune. They pointed guns at us and forced all of us to lie down on the floor in the kitchen.
“Some of the students were pulled out from their rooms and made to lie down in the passage.

“These people knew very well that we were students, they were calling us ‘cheese boys’, telling us that they came from the hostel,” he said. 
The students said they still felt safe in the commune. 
“The landlord came and we have since changed the locks because when these people left, they took the house keys with them.”
Attempts to speak to the landlord were unsuccessful. 

Last week in Umbilo, students at McDonald’s accommodation were left traumatised after they were held up inside their rooms and robbed of money, 16 cellphones and laptops. An 18-year-old first-year student was assaulted during the robbery and the landlord was pistol-whipped. 
Students who spoke to The Mercury last week said the Umbilo robbery was the third incident of that nature. They expressed fears that a syndicate might be targeting unsuspecting students.
The police said there had been numerous reports of individual students being attacked and mugged while walking to or from campuses. 
Simphiwe Joja, the acting secretary-general of the South African Students Congress, said they would prefer students to live in “student villages”. 

“We have always advocated for the building of student villages so students could be together and not be vulnerable to social ills. That is one of the reasons we have entered the land debate, because we want the building of those student villages,” said Joja. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said a case of robbery had been opened at Berea police station. 
“Four suspects robbed the victims at gunpoint at their residence at Ritson Road of laptops and cellphones. No arrest have been made as yet,” he said.
The Mercury