Durban - Ethekwini municipality councillors want the process to procure services for this year’s Umkhosi Womhlanga (the annual Reed Dance) to be “managed carefully” so the city is not left red-faced like last year.
They have demanded that a team of councillors work closely with officials in the procurement process without interfering with tender processes.
Umkhosi Womhlanga will take place at the Enyokeni Palace in KwaNongoma from September 6 to 9. Thousands of young maidens from across the country will take part in the annual festival. 
About R1.3million has been set aside by the eThekwini municipality for the event.
Related ArticlesMaidens prepare for annual Reed DanceR600m KZN cultural centre in a 'shoddy' stateR600m KZN cultural centre in a 'shoddy' stateMystery behind reed dance carpets scandalMaidens prepare for annual Reed DanceR600m KZN cultural centre in a 'shoddy' stateR600m KZN cultural centre in a 'shoddy' stateMystery behind reed dance carpets scandal12A report tabled before executive committee members Tuesday indicated that 20 female councillors from the Community Services Committee had been delegated to accompany the maidens to the event. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The money will go towards the hiring of transport, catering, accommodation and foam mattresses for maidens.
The city leadership does not want a repeat of last year’s incident. It was left embarrassed when it emerged that a carpet it had procured for the sleeping area for the maidens at a cost of R500000 was sub-standard.
Hundreds of maidens from eThekwini had arrived to find a grass-floored marquee, the carpet not laid. It eventually arrived just before 2am.
“The carpets put in for those young maidens were not good enough. This is an important matter and we must not repeat last year’s mistake,” said DA councillor Heinz De Boer. 

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi agreed. “There are municipalities smaller than ours with budgets much smaller than ours, but they are doing their projects much better than us.
“I think the problem last year was that the officials responsible for the logistics had not paid close enough attention to what they were doing,” he said. Mayor Zandile Gumede said she was also concerned. 
“The problem is that as a councillor you cannot get too close to the procurement process. 
“You could then be accused of trying to influence which contractor should be appointed. But I have spoken to some of the councillors so that they oversee process without interfering,” she said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini will deliver his main address on September 8.
The Mercury