Durban - It has been a week since the family of schoolgirl Nobuhle Mhlongo last saw the 15-year-old.
Nobuhle, a Grade 10 pupil at Wyebank Secondary School, was last seen getting ready to go to school last Wednesday. 
Her family discovered a letter tucked inside her Bible where the schoolgirl wrote she had disappointed the family and would be going away for a while.
Nobuhle’s mother, Nomthandazo Mhlongo, said the letter had phrases such as “mom I love you there is no mom like you”, “I have disappointed the family” and “please forgive me”. But the letter, she said, was not a suicide note and it had since been handed over to police. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

  
  
   15-year-old Nobuhle Mhlongo missing since July 25.
  
 
“I know she is still around, I have faith,” she said.  
The mother has since discovered through speaking with her close friends that Nobuhle had picked up bad habits including smoking and bunking school. She also met her boyfriend while she searched for her, who also did not know where she was. 
But despite the alleged smoking and bunking, which was not known to the family, she had shown a greater interest in church, said the mother.
On the day Nobuhle went missing, parents had been summoned to fetch school reports and it was here that the mother learnt her daughter had not performed well in maths and physical science, with teachers encouraging her to change subjects.
Upon hearing this, she asked to speak to her daughter, but was shocked when teachers told her she had not reported to school that day.
“I was shocked,” she said.
“Maybe she was she was afraid, but we are not the type that beats children, she is a big girl, we talk and I always encourage her to talk to me first and be open about issues,” she said.  
The mother said she was worried because as Nobuhle was asthmatic and she had not taken her asthma pump. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“When I got home I found her uniform on top of her bed and her lunchbox in the kitchen,” she recalled.
 “Right now I am busy printing her pictures to post at taxi ranks so people can contact us if they see her,” said the worried mother on Friday. 
The mother said Nobuhle lived with herself, her stepfather and young sister at their Wyebank home. She pleaded with people who had information to contact the police. 
Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said a missing person docket had been opened.
“We appeal to anyone with information on her whereabouts to contact Captain Bolley on 081 4703 852 or 031 325 5038. Our Crime Stop number can also be contacted on 086000 10111,” he said.

  
 
 
  Daily News