Durban - Students at the University of KwaZulu-Natal Westville campus, striking over below-standard accommodation, have described their residences as “glorified slums”.
On Tuesday, UKZN announced that it had suspended the academic programme for Westville only, until Friday, after students embarked on protest action again.
Roads leading to the campus were blocked and students also tried to damage university property.
The police said one student was arrested and officers used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse the protesting students.
Related ArticlesWATCH: Students go on rampage at UKZN's Westville campusPolice on high alert after violent protests flare at UKZNA security guard was also hurt in clashes with students.

Besides accommodation, the protesting students have highlighted problems with wi-fi connections, matters of academic exclusion, the shuttle service timetable and National Student Financial Aid Scheme administration. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The protest, that started last week, exploded on Monday as the students engaged in running battles with th epolice. About 17 students were arrested and several police vehicles damaged during the clashes. The protest continued yesterday. 
According to the student representative council, the 17 students had been charged with malicious damage to property and public violence. 
They were released on R500 bail each. 

The students at residences spoke to The Mercury on condition of anonymity, for fear of reprisals.
They listed a string of problems at a residence, which they said had either been ignored or dismissed by the management responsible for accommodation. Some of the problems date back to 2016. 
“We are living under conditions similar to those of a person living in a shack. At least the person living in a shack is paying R500 a month and has hot water to bath in in the morning,” said one of the students.
They said there were more than 300 students in the residence, but only about half of the bathrooms and kitchens were functional. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The students said they paid about R29000 a year for accommodation alone. 
“Our rooms leak when it rains Water flows from the top floor all the way down to the ground floor.
“We have now mastered different ‘room set-ups’ for winter and summer.
“During the summer, due to rains, you cannot place your bed against the wall; we organise our rooms according to the seasons.”

“Our ceilings are leaking; they have holes where rats come and damage our food and personal belongings,” said another student. 
Westville SRC president Fulufhelo Mulidzwi said the students’ complaints were valid.
“There are renovations currently happening, but we would like them to happen at a faster rate.”
Normah Zondo, acting executive director, Corporate Relations Division, University of KwaZulu-Natal said the academic programme had been suspended on the Westville campus to allow management to engage with student leadership and find amicable solutions. 

She said the university had made a commitment to resolve the issues of maintenance at residences.