Durban - Rampant crime in the city has forced the eThekwini Municipality to work on a crime-prevention strategy that involves all stakeholders.
This move was initiated with a stakeholders’ meeting, chaired by deputy mayor Fawzia Peer, the chairperson of the Security and Emergency Committee on Monday. 
“There is no community in South Africa, whether rich or poor, that can say they are ­devoid of crime. It would seem that when we fight crime in one area, it shifts to another,” said Peer.
“Communities are up in arms and are requesting help in dealing with crime. We need an Integrated Development Plan to ensure that the municipality has the necessary resources and capacity to implement approaches to safety. We need an overarching plan for communities,” said Peer. 
Related ArticleseThekwini metro police department 'grossly understaffed'While there were provincial and national crime-prevention strategies, the city did not have one. Peer said it was necessary to integrate all law enforcement functions into this strategy.

Currently, day to day policing was non-existent. This was due to the ever-increasing service delivery protests, business forum threats and increased land invasions to which the metro police and SAPS were deployed, said Peer.
“We have made a concerted effort to involve every stakeholder because crime and violence prevention is a collective responsibility.” 
Explaining some of the frustrations with by-law enforcement, metro police head Steve Middleton called for a crime safety strategy rather than crime prevention.
“In the by-laws, there is not a word about vagrancy, homelessness, unemployment or poverty. The city must come up with strategies on how to deal with the core causes of crime,” said Middleton. 

He said that every day approximately 500 whoonga addict living on the railway lines were pushed out and up into the city by Prasa, and back down into the railways by the metro police.
“From a policing perspective, we are dealing with crime, but no one is dealing with the core of what is causing that crime. 
“We are asking the city to help us with issues around homelessness, unemployment and drug addiction.” 
Middleton mooted a model where the homeless were given trolley’s to pick up litter to be taken to a central point in exchange for money, which would then be spent on a meal and shelter. 

“I’m just putting that idea in the deputy mayor’s hands,” he said. 
In the city’s own Municipal Services and Living Conditions Survey analysing three-year trends, the CBD is one of the top five areas the public perceived as unsafe.
According to Mahlomola Lengola, the chief policy analyst at the municipality’s Research and Policy Advocacy unit, this perception was validated by crimes statistics that showed the Durban Central police station had the highest total crime rate per 100000 people in the past two financial years. 
“More alarming is the proximity of the areas with the highest crime rate in the last two years, namely Durban Central, Point, Umbilo and Berea,” he said. 

This data would be taken into consideration when the strategy was formulated. 
The Mercury