Durban - Officials from the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature will spend two days on an Oversight Programme, visiting various War Rooms around the province to assess the impact of each in relation to service delivery.

KZN Legislature media liaison, Wesley Canham explained that officials oversee a number of functions of through the War Rooms programme, which facilitates quick response to service delivery issues by profiling households in a ward and the level of service delivery per household.
The visits will take place on August 28 and 29.
“It seeks to achieve a host of goals in each region, including the eradication of poverty and the improvement of social welfare,” Canham said. 
He said the Legislature considers War Rooms a multi-purpose, multi-sectoral and the involvement of various government departments at different layers makes this kind of oversight critical in the exercise of the legislature’s oversight role.

“This oversight programme seeks to assess whether or not the War Rooms in the province are on track, and to assess whether what was set out in the design of the project is being accomplished within the time-frames required.  The Oversight Programme will assess the composition of the War Rooms, frequency of meetings and participation by stakeholders, cases dealt with and turnaround period, data management, follow-up on issues, processing of reports, feedback to communities and overall percentage of functional Operation Sukuma Sakhe War Rooms interventions on the spot,” he said. 
According to Canham, War Rooms, are a part of a broader programme, Operation Sukuma Sakhe (OSS).
 OSS is integrating all departments to focus on solving community problems from the grassroots level. The Programme aims at promoting human values, fighting crime, diseases and social ills, to ensure moral regeneration. As part of this programme, all government departments work together, visiting the poorest, most deprived households in the province to bring health, welfare and other services to them. OSS encompasses the “One Home One Garden Programme” and ensures that families are assisted to register for birth certificates and identity documents. It promotes education, skills development and youth development and emphasizes the delivery of service and infrastructure development.
Daily News