Durban - Senior officials at the KZN Music House and the Department of Arts and Culture are to face charges on allegations of corruption that led to the collapse of the facility.
The provincial Arts and Culture Department has laid criminal charges of fraud and corruption against officials at the Music House and department officials. The case was opened at Loop Street police station in Pietermaritzburg.
The Music House, which was launched in 2009 with state-of-the-art recording facilities to assist KZN musicians, has been closed for a year, and performers are being referred to other institutions. 
The R15million facility was established by the provincial government in a bid to keep recording artists in the province, rather than see them migrating to places like Joburg.
The criminal charges come after a lengthy investigation by the provincial Treasury into allegations related to the misuse of funds. 

Provincial Arts and Culture spokesperson Mack Makhathini confirmed that charges had been laid but declined to speak about the nature of the allegations as this would be dealt with by the police and National Prosecuting Authority.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“In reporting the case, HoD (head of department) Ntokozo Chonco presented the forensic report conducted and concluded by the provincial treasury to the SAPS,” he said. 
DA MPL and arts and culture committee member George Mari said the party had been raising its concerns about the state of the KZN Music House since 2015. 
“We therefore welcome the culmination of Treasury’s probe and the subsequent laying of criminal charges.

“KZN’s Music House is a prime example of how corruption robs our people of basic services and opportunities. 
“It’s extremely disturbing that the very people who were assigned to look after this important facility are behind its downfall as a result of pure greed.”
He added that when it became clear the entity was collapsing, departmental officials passed the buck, claiming they had no control over the Music House and merely provided funding. 
“In 2016/17 the Arts and Culture Department withheld funding, causing the entity to completely break down. As a result, staff were told not to return to work,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The DA previously said the Music House had received a R12m budget for the 2015/16 financial year but failed to produce a single track. 
Mari said the collapse of the entity meant that the people it was meant to serve, namely KZN’s emerging artists, could not be assisted there.
“The DA will insist that MEC (Bongi) Sithole-Moloi and her department work quickly to ensure the resurrection of the institution so that it can be used by KZN’s emerging artists and not be a drain on taxpayers.”
KZN artists expressed mixed views about the closure.

Prominent maskandi artist Zibokwakhe “Phuzekhemisi” Mnyandu said the Music House had not served musicians of KZN.
Mnyandu, who admitted he had lost out on a tender at the facility, said: “What I know is that they have very good equipment, but in truth they have never been of any use to local artists; all I have seen from them is just cruelty and playing with people’s hopes.”
However, another artist, Sibonelo “Sosha” Ngcobo, said the facility was an important place that had led to a lot of artists being discovered and also had made him a household name. 
“About 20% of the local maskandi artists came from there. My biggest record was produced from there. There has been nothing that compares to the experience I had at the Music House. 

“I was just a producer working for other artists who were selling thousands of copies. It was the Music House under Mbongeni Ngema that gave me a chance to be a household name. Many other artists in this province started there. Its closure is a big loss. I hope it reopens to serve more artists,” said Ngcobo. 
Thokozani “T’zozo” Zulu of the Creative Workers Union of SA said: “The KZN Music House had a studio that allowed artists to record cheaply and had a talent competition that unearthed a lot of talent.
“We support action taken for those responsible for bad behaviour to be arrested but we do not support the move to close it down. They should just put in better managers,” he said.
The Mercury