Durban - Some traditional leaders in KwaZulu-Natal are revolting against King Goodwill Zwelithini’s Ingonyama Trust, saying they want full rights and control of the money being generated by their land.
Inkosi Mzabane Makhoba from Kokstad said while he was anointed by King Zwelithini and appreciated the role of the board of Ingonyama Trust in protecting traditional land from being taken over by the state, amakhosi deserved full control of their land.
“Ingonyama Trust should give traditional leaders full rights to administer finances generated through leasing the land to investors. Currently, the traditional land benefits Ingonyama Trust while traditional leaders and their communities get nothing,” he said.
“Therefore, I suggest that the land should be fully administered by amakhosi and their traditional councils for the benefit of their communities.” 
There are 303 traditional leaders in KZN, most of whom have expressed support for the Ingonyama Trust, and have called on the state not to interfere with the king’s land.

The king is the sole trustee of the trust, which administers 2,8 million hectares of mostly rural land and reportedly collects close to R90million a year through leasing land to businesses.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Inkosi Bhungane Hadebe said his community in Estcourt did not recognise the Ingonyama Trust “because we were never consulted when it was formed”.
“We share the same view with the Zulu king that the land belongs to traditional leaders and not to the government. But we cannot recognise a body that was formed without the consultation of all traditional leaders,” said Hadebe.
The campaign to protect the Ingonyama board came after former president Kgalema Motlanthe released a report compiled by a high-level panel that recommended that Parliament should consider repealing the Ingonyama Trust Act as it was unconstitutional.

The act was formulated by IFP leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi while prime minister of the defunct Zululand, and passed by former president FW Klerk’s presidency on the eve of the first democratic elections in 1994.
Last week Buthelezi told the media in Durban that he single-handedly formed Ingonyama Trust to protect the land, which used to belong to the KwaZulu government from falling under the government’s control.
Some traditional leaders have been silently opposing the powers of the Ingonyama board. 
“The king does not have the ownership of the land. The land belonged to our forefathers, who as traditional leaders had full rights and powers over their land until the formation of the Ingonyama Trust,” a traditional leader from the Midlands said on condition of anonymity.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I and a number of other traditional leaders don’t want our land to be administered by Ingonyama Trust. We want to administer our own land like we did before the Ingonyama Trust was formed in 1994.”
Another traditional leader said previously they would take their own decisions about their own land, but now had to write letters to the trust to request development on it.
Reject
“Sometimes the board would reject our requests. It means I am not an inkosi when I have to beg someone who does not belong to my land to use my land,” he said, also speaking on condition of anonymity.

But the Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa (Contralesa) secretary Inkosi Mhlabunzima Maphumulo differed. He said each traditional council had control of their respective land, although investors who wanted to operate businesses on the land signed a lease agreement with the Ingonyama Trust.
“Businesses pay an annual levy to Ingonyama Trust. There are traditional trust accounts within Ingonyama Trust of which traditional councils and amakhosi have access to that money, which helps to develop their communities,” he said.
The king’s spokesperson Thulani Zulu declined to comment, while Ingonyama Trust Board chairperson, Judge Jerome Ngwenya did not respond to questions sent to him via SMS and emails.
The Mail and Guardian recently reported that the Ingonyama board was being legally challenged for allegedly forcing businesses, churches and residents to lease their land.

The KwaZulu-Natal Council of Churches and Lutheran Church were among the groups which were preparing to go to court to stop the trust from continuing to lease the land, a situation that might see residents losing their right to own land under the traditional authorities if they fail to pay the annual fees. 
The Mercury