Durban - A textile company has been fined R6.1 million by the Competition Commission for allegedly colluding with another company when tendering for the supply of fabrics used to manufacture uniforms for the Department of Correctional Services, the SA Air Force and the Military Health Services.
The commission’s spokesperson, Sipho Ngwema, said the Competition Tribunal had confirmed a consent agreement which the commission reached with Berg River Textiles. In terms of this the company agreed in July to pay R6170 045 after it was found to have engaged in collusive behaviour with another company.
“The commission uncovered Berg River Textiles and (the other company) colluded with each other when bidding for two tenders issued by the Department of National Treasury (the Treasury) for the supply of fabric used in the manufacture of uniforms to the Department of Correctional Services, the South African Air Force and the South African Military Health Services,” Ngwema said.
The Treasury had received 12 bids for the two tenders, including those from Berg River and the other accused company, which was the first respondent in the matter against the commission.
Both tenders were awarded to the first respondent, which then outsourced the manufacture of the textiles to Berg River. 

While evaluating the second contract, Treasury officials suspected collusive behaviour due to the “appearance of identical handwriting on the bidding documents”, and notified the commission.
The commission’s investigation found that the two companies discussed and agreed on prices they were going to submit when bidding for two tenders issued by the Treasury.
According to the commission’s documents, the two companies had argued that they were not competitors since Berg River was a textile manufacturer, while the other company was not, and only focused on tender management.
In turn, the commission argued that by bidding against each other the two companies were competing for the tenders, and it therefore did not matter that they operated in different markets.

Competitor
The commission also noted that the tender was for the supply and not the manufacture of textiles, and therefore any lack of manufacturing capacity did not preclude the first respondent from being a competitor.
The matter was heard before the Competition Tribunal in September last year, and in February this year the tribunal ruled in favour of the commission and found that Berg River Textiles and the other firm were guilty of contravening the Competition Act.
In March both companies lodged an appeal at the Competition Appeal Court, but Berg River Textiles subsequently chose to settle out of court and withdraw its appeal. The R6.1m forms part of the settlement agreement. 

It also agreed to refrain from engaging in cartel conduct in future while agreeing to attend a competition law compliance training programme, and to make the training materials available to all employees to ensure they complied with the Competition Act.
The other company’s appeal is still before the Competition Appeal Court.
The Mercury tried unsuccessfully to solicit comment from Berg River Textiles and its directors. 
Enquiries revealed that the company’s factory in Mobeni had since closed down. An email was sent to its holding company, Deneb, but no response was received at the time of publish. 

The Mercury