Durban - Mahatma Gandhi should be forgiven for his racial utterances towards Africans as these were made before he could interact with or understand the people of the country, Professor Kalpana Hiralal at the University of KwaZulu-Natal said on Wednesday.
“When Gandhi came to South Africa he was unfamiliar with the terrain, with the environment and with the people. Perhaps he was uninformed, perhaps ignorant in certain ways in which communities are developed and in ways they are structured. He said certain things that were obviously derogatory with the kind of words that he used. He was a human being with lots and lots of flaws,” she said.
The professor of history in the School of Social Sciences at Howard College, UKZN, was addressing the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Lecture at the institution. She shared the podium with Gandhi’s granddaughter Ela Gandhi and Professor Judith Brown, Emeritus Professor of Commonwealth History at the University of Oxford.
“Although Gandhi, in many quarters around the world, had been hailed as the father of the liberation Struggle, his reputation had suffered because of allegations of discrimination against Africans.”
Hiralal said over time during his stay in the country, Gandhi evolved.

She said by the time Gandhi left South Africa for India in 1914 he had changed his views about Africans.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“Gandhi clearly said that various races in South Africa need to work together as a collective,” she said.
She said instead of holding grudges against Gandhi, Africans need to hold on to his positive principles “the kind legacies in terms of non-violence”.
“He was not perfect. He was like many individuals in life, even Nelson Mandela evolved. Some even criticised Mandela for taking up arms to engage in the armed struggle, but at the end of his life this is the type of Nelson Mandela we saw as the father of the nation,” Hiralal said. 

Ela Gandhi said her grandfather’s views should be contextualised.
“Whatever he said at the time needs to be interrogated like anybody else,” she said.
The Mercury