Durban - The city of Durban has had to fork out R169 million for overtime work done by Metro Police officers. In addition to this, unrest and work stoppages on developments in the city has cost eThekwini ratepayers R44.5million in security costs in the recently ended financial year.

The R44.5m was paid by the city to beef-up security at those sites which had experienced stoppages or disruptions. 
In recent months, the city has been hit by several disruptions in some multimillion-rand development projects during protests orchestrated by members of black business forums who are demanding that they be given work.
Developments that have been affected include the Go Durban project where contractors were forced to pull out fearing for the safety of its workers. This was allegedly after taxi owners wanted to be included in the project.
The information about the money spent on security at these sites is contained in the final adjustments budget tabled at the city’s executive committee meeting on Thursday. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The budget also shows that metro police continue to be overburdened with non-structured overtime as the city had to make provisions for an additional R169m to cover overtime payments.
According to the document, this overtime was incurred due to the “increased after hours for staff due to staff shortages and additional crime prevention initiatives”.
During the exco meeting, DA members raised concerns about these figures, saying they were not justified. 
DA leader in eThekwini Nicole Graham said the overtime incurred by metro police officers arose from their duties of providing protection to councillors rather than embarking on crime prevention initiatives, as stated in the document. 

“R169m is an outrageous amount, so this is very concerning.”
DA exco member Heinz de Boer concurred with Graham, saying the adjustments budget was just an indicator of bad planning by the city.
“We see an inordinate amount of metro police outside city hall guarding councillors. We need more metro police everywhere not just outside city hall. So if we are really serious about crime prevention, we need to start using some of the structured overtime to recruit more people. I am glad to see we have started recruiting people but we need to recruit again,” he said.
He said metro police should be seen guarding city residents and not just politicians.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Get a grip
Commenting on the money spent on security for projects, he proposed that the city needs to get a grip on the problem.
“I think infrastructure is important but to spend hundreds of millions of rand every year on guarding, this is simply not right. Imagine the kind of opportunities that can be created with that kind of money?”
City chief financial officer Krish Kumar said the overtime incurred at the metro police department was very high and concerning.

“We have had meetings with the head of metro police but we need to appreciate that they are under extreme pressure and while there is still crime in the city, without metro police it will be much worse.”
Kumar said some of the issues putting pressure on metro police operations included land invasions and the hosting of high-profile events in the city which required metro officers to be on duty around the clock.
Kumar said security was one of the highest expenditure items for the city. “The need is there, it is a matter of how you get communities to appreciate that they shouldn’t be harming our staff.”
When approached by The Mercury for comment, the deputy head of metro police, Wiseman Mchunu, defended the overtime, saying that it was justified given the conditions his officers were operating under.

“First, the issue of guarding councillors forms part of crime prevention. We are guarding councillors to prevent political murders because the killing of councillors is also crime. 
“Since we started providing protection to councillors, murders of councillors have decreased in this municipality.”
Mchunu also argued that his department was severely understaffed with only about 1500 active officers currently on the force. He said the full staff complement according to projections should be close to 6000 police officers currently.
“This means that we only have an eighth of a police officer for every 100m2. This is why we end up chasing crime. 

“Add to that the protests we see everyday. We deal with no less than 13 protests every three days. When there are these protests, the same DA councillors are the ones who phone repeatedly. We therefore cannot say no, we will not deploy people there because we are scared of the overtime costs,” he said.
Mchunu said the department plans to recruit 800 officers into its ranks during the current financial year. The first batch of 200 has already been recruited, he said.
The Mercury