Durban - The Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) has expressed concern over the number of cases where suspects have been killed allegedly by police officers while being interrogated. 

In the most recent case, a Chatsworth man died in hospital just hours after he was picked up by police officers and questioned about a firearm. 
Ipid spokesperson Moses Dlamini confirmed that they were looking into the allegations levelled against police officers.
It is alleged that on Tuesday night, the man was picked up by police officers and asked about a firearm. After being interrogated by police, the man was allegedly taken to the RK Khan Hospital where he died. Dlamini said they were trying to establish the veracity of the allegations thus he could not comment further. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Dlamini said it was concerning that in KZN, this was at least the third incident where police officers found themselves on the wrong side of the law. 

Last year, three police officers were arrested after two men came forward claiming that the officers had set their dogs on them. 
Constables Bhekani Dladla (30), Sipho Masango (37) and Musa Khwela (31) are accused of extorting money from two families in May. The trio, based at the Shongweni K9 Unit, allegedly set their dogs on two men on May 22.
Earlier this month, four police officers from Muden SAPS were arrested for the murder of a man. Sergeant Mxolisi Abednigo Hadebe, Constable Ntethelelo Zamokhule Hlophe, Constable Sboniso Perfect Mlungisi Mchunu and Warrant Officer Sizwe Ozias Bhengu appeared in the Greytown Magistrate’s Court in connection with the murder of Mbongiseni Ndlela. 
Dlamini said Ndlela was fetched from his home, along with three other men who were then allegedly tortured by the officers. Ndela was critically wounded and succumbed to his injuries.

"The officers then allegedly hatched a plan to discard of the 37-year-old man’s body in bushes near the Muden police station," Dlamini said. 
He said Ipid was concerned that some police officers may be using Apartheid tactics instead of good investigative techniques to solve crime. 
“This should not be happening at this time in our Constitutional democracy,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Daily News