Durban - Retshegofaditswe Hatang may only be 10-years-old, but he already has a passion for helping others.
The boy has now become one of the youngest Africans to reach the second- highest point on Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania. And all because he wanted to raise funds for schoolgirls who cannot afford sanitary pads.
Retshegofaditswe said: “I was not scared about going up the mountain. I wanted to do it because my mom told me there are some girls who cannot afford sanitary pads. I wanted to help raise funds for them.”
For the trip, the Grade 4 pupil was accompanied by his father, Nelson Mandela Foundation chief executive Sello Hatang, who was attempting his third summit.
The pair was among nine climbers who went up Kilimanjaro as part of the Trek4Mandela excursion to raise funds for local schoolgirls. The hike started on August 5 to mark the day Nelson Mandela was captured in 1962, and they summitted on Women’s Day.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Retshegofaditswe reached Stella Point, the second-highest peak on the Africa’s tallest mountain. He then had to turn back because Hatang was worried that it was getting too cold.
Hatang admits he wanted Retshegofaditswe to turn back even earlier than that.
“He had been complaining about the cold and I wanted him to turn back. I gave him my jacket and everyone said he was fine to continue because he didn’t have any symptoms of altitude sickness. I had to trust the guides.
“When we got to Gilman’s Point I wept because I was so proud of him. I realised I could have stopped my son’s dreams quicker because I was scared,” he said.

But when they got to Stella Point, Hatang put his foot down and didn’t allow Retshegofaditswe to continue. 
“The wind was too strong and he was tired. Just exhausted. At that point, I realised continuing would be taking it too far.
“He cried so much - he kept asking why he had to turn back because he was so close. He will go back when he is 16,” Hatang said. But for Retshegofaditswe, the first trip up Kilimanjaro has started a love story and he would like to go back again next year - and this time reach Uhuru Peak. “I will try to convince my dad to let me go back next year. If I don’t, I will have to think of other ways I can raise funds,” Retshegofaditswe said.
Hatang said doing Kilimanjaro with his son was stressful. “He has been hiking for a while. He has done the Drakensberg a lot over the last three years and has been trying to convince me about Kilimanjaro. If he wants to go back, he will have to make the decision when he is 17, not now,” Hatang said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said he had also had a talk with his daughter Lethabo, 16, saying if she wants to attempt Kilimanjaro, she must wait until she is at university. 
Lethabo, who is also an avid hiker, is the only member of the family who has not gone up the Tanzanian mountain. Hatang’s wife Thembi summitted last year.
Hatang said the trip had taught him to let go and be a more trusting parent.
“It taught me to trust people with my child. To give him over to the village and he will be fine. During the expedition, everyone became his parent. Sometimes parents make things that are easy difficult because of fear.”

On the first day of the expedition, Retshegofaditswe’s maternal grandmother died, but he was not informed. 
“The last night on the mountain, he said he missed his granny and his dog. I told him to dedicate the trip to his granny because she had been unwell. So the trip has a double meaning,” Hatang said. 
Retshegofaditswe was only told once he was off the mountain that his grandmother had died.
For Hatang, the biggest pride is in his children acknowledging their privilege and taking up charity work. “It is beyond the mountain. You cannot ask for more if your children are good and kind people who want to help others,” he said.

The next Trek4Mandela to Mount Kilimanjaro will be in March 2019 for Human Rights Day.
The Mercury