Durban - The Durban University of Technology's (DUT) health sciences dean Professor Nokuthula Sibiya, has won the Distinguished Woman Scientist Award in the Human Sciences category at the 2018 South African Women in Science Awards (SAWiSA).  The event took place at The Ranch Hotel in Polokwane on Thursday. 

Speaking to IOL before boarding a flight back to Durban, Sibiya said she was overwhelmed. 
"I was one of three finalists and I was so overwhelmed with excitement when my name was called," she said. 
The professor is a C3-rated researcher and an author of 40 peer-reviewed publications, two books and 10 books chapters. She has presented her papers at national and international conferences. Sibiya has successfully supervised eight doctoral, 45 masters and 22 BTech students and is currently supervising a further eight doctoral and five masters students.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Sibiya said of her nomination, and subsequent win: “When I submitted my nomination for the award, I had to include a motivation of how my research innovation had enhanced inclusive growth and development of women in particular. Of the 53 postgraduate students I have successfully supervised, 47 are women. The majority of these women graduates (19) are currently appointed as lecturers in higher education institutions and at colleges," she said.

Sibiya said one her PhD graduates, who was a woman, held a senior position in the National Department of Correctional Services.
Sibiya said the recognition was "huge motivation" for her to continue with her contribution towards the research output at DUT. 
“Besides contributing a new body of knowledge through research, the resultant research output subsidy also contributes to the financial sustainability of our university. So, I take research seriously, as this is one of my core business as an academic at DUT,” she said.
“In order to build capacity, experienced researchers should strive to involve students in research projects and empower them with skills of writing for publication. As the Executive Dean, I have limited time to focus on research but I always work with teams to maintain the momentum,” she added.

Sibiya also extended her gratitude to DUT for affording her the opportunity to grow and develop as a researcher. 
“As women academics, we need to join hands and support each other in pushing the boundaries,” she said.
The event was hosted by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) has been in existence since 2003. The awards recognise the achievements of women scientists and provide motivation for the increased participation of women in research. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The 2018 edition of SAWiSA was held under the theme, "100 years of Mama Albertina Sisulu: Women united in moving South Africa forward".

To other women wanting to follow in her footsteps, Sibiya said: "It is do-able. That is what I want to say to younger women. If we join hands and work together, great things can be achieved," she said. 
Daily News