Durban - Eskom is proposing two new sub-stations be built in the Shongweni area, near Summerveld, to reduce power outages in the city and ensure that eThekwini residents’ electricity demands are met for the next 20 years. 
The Shongweni project will consist of the development of two new 500 mega volt amp (MVA) sub-stations and two 400 kilovolts (kV) of power lines that will run for about 15km in ward 4 of eThekwini municipality. 
It is expected that the proposed project would directly and indirectly improve the standard of living for the province’s communities as it would create employment, generate income and contribute to the local and national economy. 
Local councillor Tex Collins welcomed Eskom’s proposal and said the new developments sprouting in the Mpumalanga and Cato Ridge areas could also benefit from the power project. 
“If they are planning to provide more electricity that will enhance service delivery and the lifestyle of our people then that is never a bad thing. Development is happening all around and people are always moving, so there is going to be a need for this,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Collins said the power project was an “absolute necessity” for those living and working in the area. 
The proposed project falls in the corridor between the province’s capital, Pietermaritzburg, and Durban “which seems like the obvious place to build”, said Collins. 
“(Durban) is so full with infrastructure and development that it seems only logical to start developing inland. This is not a train smash as long as all the necessary procedures and environmental impact reports are done,” Collins said.
Currently, the eThekwini electricity network has four 275kV transmission in-feeds from Georgedale, Hector, Illovo and Avon sub-stations.

Avon sub-station supplies Ottawa and Durban North sub-stations; Georgedale and Hector sub-stations supply Klaarwater sub-station; and lllovo sub-station supplies Durban South and Lotus Park sub-stations. 
According to the Environmental Assessment Report that delved into the city’s electricity structures and plans, the load forecast shows the load demand doubling in the areas supplied by Ottawa and Durban North sub-stations in the next 20 years.
Growth
The area supplied by Klaarwater is expected to grow by 20% and the area supplied by Durban South and Lotus Park sub-stations is expected to grow by 30% over the same period. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This projected forecast of growth in the city’s suburbs and business districts resulted in eThekwini municipality approaching Eskom to expand their infrastructure. 
According to the environmental assessment, the proposed area is fairly steep and is currently used for various purposes, including farming, residential and related activities.
Most of the agricultural land is used for sugar cane farming, while other farming practices, such as horse rearing and subsistence farming, are also taking place.
The report states that the construction phase of the proposed project will take about three years to be completed.

The report adds that the proposed Shongweni sub-station and the power line form part of network strengthening, which is driven by industries and agriculture, and is part of the new infrastructures that Eskom has planned. 
The main aim of the project is to respond to the demand and ensure reliable electricity supply to eThekwini customers.
The assessment shows that the supply link between the existing Hector sub-station and the proposed Shongweni sub-station and power line supply network will be strengthened, and there will be improvements in the reliability of electricity supply, which will benefit agriculture, tourism, residential interests and industries in the area.
“The proposed project is beneficial as it will allow for load growth in the region and would ensure reliable supply to industry, predominantly the agricultural, tourism, residential and manufacturing industries in the area. This will indirectly benefit communities as reliable electricity will result in uninterrupted production and therefore growth in industry, which could potentially yield additional jobs. 

“The overarching impact will be positive economic spin-offs, which benefit the community, the region and country at large,” read the report.
At the local level, it said the benefits of the project would centre on ensuring improved reliability of supply and entrench the reach of electricity into communities. 
It is envisaged that the proposed project would ensure that marginal communities in the region were supplied with electricity, and might reduce the community’s reliance on firewood as their primary energy source.
Eskom did not respond to questions last week regarding the cost of the project and when construction would start.

The Mercury