Durban - Unemployed graduates have for the second time this year taken to the streets, marching to the Durban City Hall to express their frustration at not being able to land jobs. 
March leader Nkululeko Ndlovu said they had written submissions to several departments and on Wednesday handed a memorandum to the eThekwini Municipality, calling for engagement on the plight of the many unemployed graduates in the city. 
“Our memorandum is directed to government and the private sector. We know youth unemployment is a national crisis but we are asking that each province do something. If they are to formulate policies, they must talk to us. Career guidance from as early as primary school, should be focused on industry, especially those industries in demand. And there should be an entrepreneurship module,” he said. 
Ndlovu obtained his cost and management accounting qualification and a post graduate diploma in education before obtaining an internship which, like other graduates at the march, has come to an end. 
Sibongakonke Gumede jokingly described himself as a career intern, having only been able to land internships since graduating in 2012. 

“I studied public management because I wanted to make a difference in communities. I am doing that in my current internship at the eThekwini Municipality but I’m afraid it won’t last and I will again be out on the street.”
Gumede said while the stipend he earned was not sufficient, it was at least enough for him to go to work where he gained work experience, which was what he had been told he lacked for the jobs he had applied for. 
Wiseman Clive Ngubo thought pursuing fine arts, a career which his parents ­believed was less popular and therefore had fewer graduates, would guarantee him a job.
“As an artist people ask why not start your own thing? Well, in order to do that I need business skills, start-up capital, a place to work in and a client base. 

“It’s not as easy as people think, I may have the talent and passion for what I do but here I am unemployed with skills and qualifications for six years,” he said. 
Siyabonga Nsele also chose a course based on demand. “I started studying agriculture after matric in 2007, because I read it was a scarce skill. And initially, things went well, I immediately got in-service training, but it ended after a year.”
Although he had gained some experience as a trainee and performed well, they did not offer him a permanent job and instead took in the next cohort of trainees, which he believes was their way of getting the work done while only paying stipends. 
He returned to university to study human resource management but has only been able to land a job in a banking programme for graduates. 

Nonkululeko Ngubane was passing by when she saw the protest and stopped to listen to the all too familiar cries of the unemployed graduates. She obtained her law degree in 2008 but it was only in 2016 that she landed a non-paying internship at police legal services. 
“I thought finally, this is the start of the legal career I had dreamed of and worked so hard for.” 
But, like the others, this was strictly an internship with no prospects for permanent employment. “I’ve tried to find work at supermarkets, they say I’m over qualified, at law firms I’m under qualified or don’t have experience. I loved law but if I could go back I’d work harder at maths and science and study medicine, it seems they don’t have trouble finding employment.”
The memorandum was accepted by Mlungisi Ntombela, adviser to mayor Zandile Gumede. 

The Mercury