Durban -  In the run-up to the 2016 local government elections, senior officials at the former Ezinqoleni local municipality were allegedly “emptying” council accounts and spending the money on bogus community projects.
The corruption allegations against the south coast municipality officials have been made by an opposition party councillor after having seen the forensic report on the allegations of abuse of financial resources. 
Ezinqoleni merged with Hibiscus Coast Municipality after the 2016 elections to form Ray Nkonyeni municipality. 
The investigation was led by the Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs Department and MEC Nomusa-Dube Ncube personally went to the municipality to table the report. It was cold comfort to some councillors who felt some of its recommendations would be difficult to implement. 
The report found about R35 million was irregularly spent in one month before the two municipalities merged. The projects including community halls, and the appointment of service providers had been in violation of supply chain management processes and non-compliant with legal requirements.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This resulted in irregular expenditure, irregular awarding of tenders and inflated costs that negatively impacted on resources for the people of Ezinqoleni. 
The report is said to have implicated senior municipal officials in the wrongdoing, with the then councillors blamed for failing to play their oversight role. 
It recommended charges including criminal, disciplinary measures and civil recoveries against the former Ezinqoleni municipality staff still employed by the council. 
IFP chief whip Sfundo Ngwane said: “From what we saw, the public should just accept that the money is gone.

“The report mentions three officials implicated. One of those officials is no longer in government making it almost impossible to pursue. 
“It recommends councillors who failed to perform their oversight duties to be investigated. That could take years and that is why I believe nothing is ever going to come of this investigation,” he said. 
Ngwane said he was shocked by the findings. 
“Just days before the elections people were emptying reserves of the municipality.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Four days after the elections more money was paid to service providers for projects, yet there is no paper trail. 
“Projects were approved and started but never completed. Some were never even started, although the money had been paid. Renovations were approved and paid for but never done,” he said. 
Dube-Ncube said she had given the council 21 days to act. Those who’d since left should be charged criminally and civil recoveries considered.
The Mercury