Durban - A fourth person is expected to be arrested for the murders of young siblings who were killed in a rock-throwing incident on the N2 highway near oThongathi, outside Durban. 
This was revealed by the investigating officer in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court on Thursday, when the accused Qiniso Bhekithemba Gumbi, 20, Nathan Govender, 27, and his father, Selvan Govender, 46, were applying for bail. 
The trio are accused of the murders of Amina Haffajee, 15, and her brother Abdul Rahim, 7, who were struck on their heads when a boulder was thrown on to the vehicle they were travelling in last December. 
Investigating officer Ivan Padayachee said the three had been arrested earlier this month, after five people came forward with information implicating them.
Padayachee took the stand to testify against bail, saying that because of the seriousness of the crime, he believed the trio would flee. 

Earlier, attorney Rajendra Nathalal, acting for the accused, read their bail affidavits to the court. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The accused said they intended pleading not guilty and had been at a Tongaat property, where they all lived, at the time of the incident. 
None had any travel documents and were firmly rooted in the area, the court heard. 
They also said they did not know who the witnesses were so could not interfere with or intimidate them. 

However, in his testimony, Padayachee said the five witnesses, who are all minors, knew the accused and had interacted with them on the day of the murders. 
He said they had been so afraid of them that they had not told police what they knew as Selvan, in particular, was well known to Tongaat police.
Witnesses
It was only when the case was transferred to the Organised Crimes Unit that the witnesses made statements implicating the three men. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This evidence was gathered between February, the same month the case was handed over to Padayachee, and the following month. 
Nathalal asked why it had taken so long for the arrests to be made. Padayachee said the investigation was still ongoing but it had taken so long - particularly for the DNA report - that he could no longer hold off on the arrests. 
However, when cross-examined by Nathalal, he admitted that while they were awaiting a DNA report, there had been no DNA found on the rock to compare to that of the accused. Padayachee mentioned that he handled most of rock-throwing cases, which were on the rise in the province. 
The court heard that the motive was usually robbery. Asked by Nathalal about the motive in this case, Padayachee said that in his opinion, if the motive had been robbery, it was most probably abandoned because of the gruesome nature of the head injuries sustained by Amina and Abdul. 

He said he believed the State had a strong case against the trio.
The court heard that Selvan had no previous or pending cases, while Nathan was convicted for drug-related and drunk driving cases in 2013 and 2014 respectively. Gumbi had been convicted of a crime related to a dangerous weapon. 
The court also heard that since their arrest, the home they shared and worked in as mechanics, had been vandalised and items - including parts of customers’ cars - had been stolen. 
They complained about the shocking conditions at the awaiting trial section at Westville Correctional Facility and said the arrest and incarceration had caused them and their families great emotional and psychological damage. 

An affidavit from a relative stating that he had been with them on the day of the murders was also handed in as part of their application. 
The bail quest continues on August 29. 
The Mercury