DURBAN - THE alleged racist Westville Girs High School teacher says she is not racist and denies using the k-word during a classroom rant at the prestigious all-girls school last week. 
The former Westville Girls High English teacher, Danielle De Bruyne, told TimesLive on Thursday she resigned because it was the best option for the school, pupils and herself.
The school had said in a statement that she made racist remarks. De Bruyne said she had since apologised to the school and it's pupils for airing her personal views.
“I did not use the ‘k-word’ in reference to any individual or group nor have I been accused of doing so. I had a good rapport with the learners… when I apologised to them for imposing my own political views on them‚ many of them seemed to be forgiving.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“I am a past pupil of Westville Girls’ High. I grew up in a multi-racial environment and have close friends of all races who know I am not a racist.
“This incident has been very traumatic. But I have learned a valuable lesson. I know that in the spirit of reconciliation‚ which South Africans are known for‚ I can be forgiven.
“I made a mistake. I am still young and I still have a lot to offer,” she said.
Westville Girls High principal, Catherine Raw, said in a statement that she was "sad and troubled" by the conduct of the English teacher, who she said, “stepped out of her role of teacher, and used her position of parent in the classroom to make racist remarks and shared her biased opinion of the South African political situation”.
Raw said the teacher broke the law and violated the school’s code of conduct and “ created a hurtful and unsafe environment for learners in her class".
"Please be assured that an individual teacher's racist comment and subsequent loss of control and bigoted view of the SA political landscape is not one shared by the school," said Raw.
A teacher union in KwaZulu-Natal has since slammed the conduct of the former teacher who resigned recently amid allegations of racism.
The teacher had reportedly referred to black girls at the school as the k-word during a classroom discussion and had told the class there was reverse racism in South Africa, referring to the killing of farmers, TimesLive reported. She also allegedly said South Africa would be like Zimbabwe, if land expropriation was pursued.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Teacher union Naptosa KwaZulu-Natal’s chief executive, Thirona Moodley, said it was unfortunate that teachers - who were expected to be agents of democracy - were now resorting to racism.
“Educators are expected to deliver the curriculum in a responsible manner, in a manner that develops young people into responsible conscious citizens. Educators who have racist tendencies have no place in the classroom as they will have the power to influence young minds and undo the strides our democracy has made,” said Moodley.
Moodley said teachers should be aware of the code of conduct as prescribed by the South African Council of Educators.
"Naptosa is regularly training our members on the consequences of such behavior, which could result in them being struck off the roll and not being allowed to teach in South Africa or anywhere else for that matter,” said Moodley.
Moodley urged parents to be alert and respond to complaints from their children and report to the school and relevant authorities, where necessary.
DAILY NEWS