Durban - Staff shortages, inaccessible roads and the lack of surveillance cameras in the area have contributed to Inanda police station being listed as having the highest number of reported rape cases in the country.
The release of the 2016/2017 crime statistics revealed that the station had 348 reported sexual offences cases, of which 309 were rape cases. The reported rape cases increased by 13.6% from the 2015/16 financial year.
According to members of the DA who conducted an oversight visit to the station on Monday, the contributing factors made it impossible for Inanda police to perform raids, patrols and to timeously respond to call-outs.
Zakhele Mbhele, the DA’s police spokesperson, and Shehana Kajee, the DA Women’s Network KZN chairperson, along with North Central Durban Constituency head Tim Brauteseth visited the station.
The DA has challenged Police Minister Bheki Cele to visit the Inanda police station to ensure it is adequately resourced.

“These numbers are truly astonishing and the figures could possibly be much worse, given the fact that many rape victims do not report the crime due to their fear of re-victimisation at the hands of the ­police,” said Mbhele. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
According to Mbhele and the DA team who visited the station, the police there attributed the high rape rate in Inanda to alcohol abuse in the community. Mbhele said there were an estimated 177 licensed liquor spots in the area, and an unknown number of unlicensed ones.
“The low conviction rates for rape are also an area of concern for the Inanda police due to chronic delays in getting DNA results,” Mbhele said.
From previous oversight inspections, the DA found that township police stations in general were under-resourced and under-equipped. Police officers were often under-trained to effectively combat crime.

“Victims of sexual violence deserve to have access to safe and dignified police stations when they report the crime. South Africans deserve a professional and well-resourced police force that is able to bring down the high rape rates and crime levels,” he said. 
Mbhele said the DA was committed to seeing police stations that were equipped with adequate resources and specialised training for police personnel to ensure that victims of sexual violence were treated with dignity, and that justice was served.
The police did not respond to a request for comment by the time of going to publish. 
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads