“Let us reach out to the children. Let us do whatever we can to support their fight to rise above their pain and suffering.”  

Those poignant words of Nelson Mandela’s still ring true today, and it’s fitting that in the month of Madiba’s 100th birthday, the organisation of which he is patron – the Smile Foundation – has announced that it is extending its efforts to help children who are in desperate need of facial surgery to include KwaZulu-Natal, with the first operations scheduled for later this year.
 The Smile Foundation was founded at Madiba’s request, and is a proactive NGO that assists children with treatable facial anomalies to access critical facial reconstructive surgeries that have the power to change their lives. 
To support this meaningful initiative with much-needed funds, ToyZone and The Pearls Mall have once again teamed up to host the ToyZone Kids Cycle Race this August…and everyone is invited!AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 A fun day out for the whole family, the ToyZone Kids Cycle Race caters for riders of all ages, from three months to 13 years, and for all ‘cycles’, including their own bicycles, tricycles, scooters and even prams.  

 Parents can walk (or run!) alongside their child around the track, as well as bring the littlies along for the ride by pushing them in their prams. 
Helmets are a must for every rider – except the tots in their prams – and a strict ‘no helmet, no ride’ rule will apply.
Kids can also have fun at the dedicated play area; enjoy the school exhibition stands and entertainment; or tuck into any of the food, sweet treats, toys and games that will be for sale on the day. 
There will also be tons of great prizes to be won, and every race participant will receive a medal as well as a goodie bag filled with toys from ToyZone.

Hedley Lewis, Smile Foundation's CEO, says the organisation is delighted to be furthering Madiba’s legacy by extending its outreach efforts to include children in KwaZulu-Natal, and is thrilled to partner with ToyZone and The Pearls Mall in changing these children’s lives.
 “There are so many children in need of reconstructive surgery. These children battle immensely with their physical and emotional scars. Our work as the Smile Foundation helps ease some of that pain and suffering by supporting these children and their families throughout the process. Through these efforts, these children are given a chance at a normal life, which is just incredible,” explains Lewis.  
ToyZone is thrilled to be involved with this initiative. We look forward to continuing to bring smiles and joy to more children’s faces in the future,” says Riaz Loonat, head of merchandise and operations manager at ToyZone.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
There are four races that form part of the ToyZone Kids Cycle Race, categorised according to participants’ ages and the relevant distances for these ages. They are:

 •             Ducklings: a 1km lap for tots aged 3 months to 3 years
•             Bunnies: a 2km circuit for youngsters aged 4 to 6 years
•             Foxes: a 3km course for kids aged 7 to 9 years
•             Lions: a 5km race for older kids aged 10 to 13 years

 The ToyZone Kids Cycle Race takes place on Saturday, 11 August 2018 at the Level 2A parking lot at The Pearls Mall of Umhlanga Mall.
Registration starts at 8:30am, with riders in the first race hitting the road at 9:00am sharp. 
The cost is R80 per entry, and bookings can be made at www.smilefoundation.co.za
Race queries can be directed to Chloe on chloe@smilefoundationsa.org or 083 629 3775.

All funds raised go towards patient support in KZN.