Durban - Tensions between the staff and the municipal manager at Richmond Municipality have increased so much so that she is allegedly no longer coming to work and is “running” the council through emails.
Richmond municipal manager Bongiwe Mnikathi has faced numerous unsuccessful attempts to oust her.
Besides Mnikathi’s battles, other senior council leadership also have problems. The chief financial officer and the technical director are on suspension. 
Workers and the community have joined forces to oust Mnikathi from office. On Wednesday, community members demonstrated outside the council building, and workers embark on a “go slow” every time she is in the building. 
Mnikathi dismissed the allegations that she was no longer coming to work, saying that when she is out of office she is attending to council business and her superiors know her whereabouts. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She said those complaining were mostly general staff, who embarked on an illegal strike and are now being disciplined.
A source in the council said: “The staff are not happy that Mnikathi is here while there is an investigation against her.” 
Simbongile Mbalekwa, secretary of the South African Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) in Richmond, said there are workers who do not know her as she has never been introduced to them.
“She does not come to the office any more. I think the last time she was here was on Tuesday, but she sends emails giving instructions.”

She alleged that council workers were being replaced with contractors. 
“She failed to fix maintenance equipment and now some of the work that should be done by council staff, of fixing potholes, is now being done by contractors.” 
Phakamani Nzimande, leader of the ANC Youth League in Ward 2 in Richmond, said the municipality was dysfunctional. 
“We do not want the current municipal manager because if she continues to stay here, it’s clear the problems in Richmond will continue. She does not attend community meetings; no one in Richmond even knows what she looks like,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mnikathi said most of the people who are complaining are people who do not report to her. 
“This is about politicking and this environment is very volatile and has been since I took this job. It concerns me that the previous municipal manager (Sibusiso Sithole) was murdered. My family has been placed under strain and it’s a miracle that I am still alive.” 
Municipal spokesperson Sibonelo Bhengu said: “There are challenges in the municipality and we are working to find a solution.” 
The Mercury