Durban - The EFF will hand its votes to the ANC, to ensure a majority win, when members of Parliament cast their votes on whether land should be expropriated without compensation.
The EFF’s Vusi Khoza pegged the party’s stance on the land issue in response to the DA, which brought a motion in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature this week.
“There will be land expropriation without compensation whether the DA likes it or not,” Khoza told the sitting. 
He also took a swipe at the IFP, which supported the independence of the Ingonyama Trust, saying the trust was an “administrative arrangement” and the land it looked after belonged to the state.
Provincial DA leader Zwakele Mncwango brought the motion before the legislature, saying that it needed to discuss the issue that had shaken the country while ­public hearings were under way.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mncwango raised concerns over President Cyril Ramaphosa’s comments at the ANC’s lekgotla this week, when he said the party had taken the decision to amend the Constitution. “This shows the ANC undermines the public opinion if the party has taken a decision without waiting for public hearings to conclude,” Mncwango said. 
He said there were barriers to land reform and, after listening to people at the recent public hearings held in the province, Mncwango said it was clear that the Constitution was not the problem.
He said the ANC and the EFF were intent on skirting the real issues around land reform, claiming that the current requirement - to pay fair and equitable compensation - was not the biggest constraint to land reform. Mncwango said that lack of political will, training and capacity had proved to be a more serious stumbling block to land reform. 
Debating on behalf of the ANC, Themba Mthembu accused the DA of being everything that the majority of historically dispossessed South Africans had fought against. 

The IFP’s Blessed Gwala questioned how the ANC and EFF were planning to expropriate land without explaining how they planned to redistribute it.
The Mercury