DURBAN - THE police have arrested a 38-year-old suspect for defeating the ends of justice by allegedly opening a fake case, and in another unrelated matter, three men were arrested for a fake hijacking case.
The suspect alleged he had been robbed at gunpoint by two men while paying workers at a construction site on the M4 highway in Durban North. 
“Whist walking towards them (the workers) he was confronted by two armed men who pointed firearms at him, assaulted him and robbed him of a bag he was carrying as well as his cellphone. They allegedly fled with the bag containing cash in their getaway vehicle towards Durban,” police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said.
Police opened a case of armed robbery and upon investigating, it was found that the story did not match with the evidence available to the police and the suspect was deemed to have opened a false case.
“He was charged for defeating the course of justice and he will appear in the Durban Magistrates Court soon. Communities are once again urged to refrain from opening false cases as valuable police resources are wasted and this puts a further strain on the limited resources at polices disposal,” said Mbhele.
Meanwhile, in an unrelated case, three suspects were nabbed by the police for opening a false hijacking case in Tongaat. The accused, who are between 18 and 22, appeared in the Verulam Magistrates Court and were released on R500 bail. 
Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said they had alleged they had given a lift to hitchhiker who then pointed a firearm at the driver and instructed him to drive to Umdloti. 
“While at Umdloti the said vehicle crashed into another vehicle and into a barrier. The alleged hijacker fled the scene and according to the driver, nothing was taken. Police obtained a sworn statements from all three occupants of the VW Polo who stated that they were hijacked,” said Zwane.
“Following an investigation by detectives it was established that all three were lying and had opened a false case of hijacking. All three suspects were arrested and charged with defeating the ends of justice. This is once again an indication that our police officers will not condone the misuse of police resources through the opening of false cases,” said Zwane.
DAILY NEWS