Durban - Police union Popcru has called for the overhaul of some of the country’s legislation which prevents the police from effectively protecting themselves against dangerous criminals.
Reacting to the killing of a policeman at the KwaMashu hostel on Friday night, Mbongeni Dladla, the KwaZulu-Natal chairperson of Popcru, said the union felt police killings would continue until legislation such as the Criminal Procedures Act was amended to give the police more teeth to fight crime.
“The legislation we have makes it difficult for the police to protect themselves in that they have to wait for the perpetrators to do something first, before they act. Such legislation gives more power to the criminals than the police,” Dladla said.
Constable Mbiko Buthelezi, 36, was shot dead on Friday night when he and a colleague went to investigate gunshots that had been heard coming from the volatile KwaMashu hostel.
The police said that when the two policemen, who were in the area, went to investigate they saw two suspects fleeing. They gave chase and went into the informal settlement, where shots were fired at them. 

Buthelezi was shot in the head, while his 28-year-old colleague, who is recovering in hospital, was shot in the thigh. 
Nano Buthelezi, the slain policeman’s sister, described her brother as a bubbly person who had dedicated his life to his job.
“I would not want those who killed him to go to jail because what good would that do? If they go to jail they will continue to live, and they will be fed there. I just wish them death,” she said.
Nono said her brother joined the police force six years ago and had worked in the volatile Ntuzuma, KwaMashu, Inanda and surrounding areas.

“We are devastated. He was the breadwinner in the family.
“He has three children, the eldest being 18, the second one is 9 and the last born is just 2 years old,” she said.
Buthelezi was one of two police officers killed in different incidents on Friday. Another 36-year-old constable was shot dead while in pursuit of a suspect who was involved in a robbery.
It is alleged that the constable and his colleagues had come across a robbery in progress in Malvern in eastern Joburg. 

He was shot while chasing the suspect on foot. 
Following the killings, the acting national commissioner for police, Lieutenant-General Lebeoana Jacob, ordered that a 72-hour activation plan be put in place to track down the killers.
“We have been doing well in combating serious crimes around the country, but at the expense of several of our members. 
“The time is now for our communities to rally behind the police to put an end to these continuous attacks on the authority of the state,” he said.

Last week Police Minister Bheki Cele said police officers should not hesitate to use their guns when in danger. 
“We won’t give you a gun and you die with it. It’s not right that we sit back and keep quiet. There must be blood, but it cannot be that of a police officer,” Cele was quoted as saying.
But Popcru believes the SAPS does not have a plan to effectively curb police killings. 
“There is no place in the world where police are as vulnerable as they are here. Unfortunately, we live in a violent society, but the employer does not have any plan to deal with this. 

“Yes, they will make these political statements that they will support officers if they protect themselves, but everyday we have police officers being hauled to court. Not once have we seen the police commissioner or the minister going to court to lend support to these officers,” Dladla said.
KZN’s community safety and liaison MEC, Mxolisi Kaunda, has promised that more police operations will be activated in the KwaMashu hostel, saying he was angered by the killing of the police- man.
“What is more concerning to the MEC is that here we are dealing with an area that is notorious for being a haven for criminals, and when police make an effort to clamp down on crime they become the targets,” said Kaunda’s spokesperson Kwanele Ncalane.
He added that there would be “serious operations” activated in the area. 

While there have been some positives in terms of criminals being arrested at the hostel, Kaunda said more could be done.
At the time of publication, the suspects in the killings had not been arrested.
The Mercury