Durban - It took the whole day to remove the carcass of a humpback whale which died when it beached at Amanzimtoti on Tuesday morning.  The whale was spotted at about 6am and was reportedly still alive and flailing in the water at Pipeline Beach.  

 However, some believe the whale was dead when it beached and the movement of its fins was caused by the waves hitting them. 

 




 Musa Mntambo, spokesperson for Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, said the cause of death could not be determined as the carcass was destroyed. He said the 4 to 6-metre whale was a sub-adult. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Although its weight cannot be determined, humpback whales can weigh as much as 30 tons and grow to more than 15m long. 

An eThekwini Municipality TLB vehicle was brought to the beach to pull the carcass out of the water by its tail. But the carcass was so heavy that the front of the vehicle lifted and the heavy duty rope snapped. 
It took six people, including a police search-and-rescue officer and municipal worker, to reposition the rope. 
AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 






 



Michael Dowker and Jacques de Klerk, who are instructors from Aliwal Dive Centre, assisted. They had come hoping to spot sharks but were roped in to help secure the rope around the whale’s body, Dowker said.
De Klerk said that while he had seen many whales, especially at this time of year as they migrate north to warmer waters, this was the first beached whale he had seen. 
They had to lift the fins on to the body as they worked as they are encrusted with barnacles. “We didn’t want to get hit and cut by them because the fins move with the water,” said De Klerk. 
Mntambo said the remains from the carcass would be discarded at a landfill. On hearing about the beaching, businessman Joe Puren changed his work plans and headed to the beach to fish for sharks. 

“I caught a 108kg shark this morning. I was expecting there to be more shark fishermen here because these whales attract sharks.” The recreational fisherman released the dusky shark after weighing it.
The Mercury