Durban - KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board workers are set to down tools again after wage talks deadlocked on Monday.
The Sharks Board said it was aware of the strike by the unionised workers, adding that it was taking all the necessary precautions.
“We have not removed the nets from the water, we will come up with alternative ways to have them maintained. Those who are unionised will strike, but others will continue to work, so we anticipate that it will be business as usual. 
“However, one cannot pre-empt what will happen and we will watch the situation closely,” said Harry Mbambo, the executive responsible for business development at the Sharks Board.
Mbambo said management had done all in its power to meet employees’ demands.

“Their demands must talk to our budget allocation. We can’t offer something that does not exist. We offered the workers a double-digit increase,” Mbambo said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The workers are demanding, among other things, a 15% pay increase across the board.
Employee spokesperson, Mxolisi Cekwayo said the workers were not happy with the employer’s offers.
“We said that the salaries of the lowest-earning workers who are currently earning R6 100 should be adjusted to a minimum of R10 000. They agreed to that, and now we are saying that the second group currently earning between R9 000 and R10 000 should also get adjustments to push them to R13 000, and the employer does not agree,” Cekwayo said.

The workers threatened not to service the shark nets until all their demands were met.
“The shark nets have to be serviced regularly, and if this is not done it becomes dangerous,” he warned. Last month, due to the workers’ strike, the shark nets were removed, leading to public ­beaches along the KZN coast being closed. 
The resumption of the strike comes with the employees still in mourning after a boat accident involving five Sharks Board workers. Two died, while two others survived. One worker, Siyabonga Gabela, is still missing.
Cekwayo also blamed this on management, saying that the life jackets offered to workers were different to those worn by supervisors. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is impossible for the seamen to work while wearing those life jackets, so much so that they take them off. Had Gabela been wearing it his body would have been found as it would have floated,” he said.
Mbambo denied this, saying that Sharks Board employees were well trained and that all health and safety requirements had been met.
The Mercury