Durban - The family of an elderly Chatsworth businessman who was tied up, gagged and beaten in a home invasion, say the man had fought with his attackers.
Bhim Sukununun died in hospital on Friday after he was found unconscious in the back garden of his Silverglen home, after a brutal assault by assailants in the early hours of that morning. 
His grandson Shravan Bhim said the 82-year-old was sleeping in his home in the early hours of Friday when he was dragged out of his home, beaten, then bound with material from his own bedroom and left for dead. 
“My aunt was in her room upstairs. Two men walked into her room and took her phone but she was so afraid she pretended to be asleep. When they left she locked the door and started screaming,” said Bhim. When the assailants left, she and two other visiting relatives went downstairs and made the gruesome discovery. 
“Although my grandfather was active, he was a very old man. He had serious medical conditions and just had a brand-new pacemaker fitted two weeks ago. We were worried because of his age but he came out of surgery strong and fit. He survived all of these conditions only to be murdered in such a brutal manner, that really hurts us as a family,” said Bhim. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said when preparing his grandfather’s body for the funeral on Saturday they found bruises on his chin, face, a gash in the back of his head and defensive wounds on his hands. 
“Old as he was, he obviously fought for his life. That is just the kind of man he was. He never gave up,” said Bhim. 
The businessman had built his car mechanic business, and although it is now run by his son Nirosh, he still spent his days there. 
“My grandfather did a lot for his community, he was such a giving man. Since he died people have been coming forward and telling us the kind things he did for them over the years. But he lived a hard life in the past few years, always having to fight thugs breaking into the shop. That’s how bad the level of crime is in Chatsworth.”

Ward councillor Tony Govender, who knew Sukununun personally, echoed this, saying the murder and the brutality of the assault on a defenceless elderly man was a declaration of war against Chatsworth residents. 
“Shock and fear is gripping the entire area. What could he have done to them? It’s bad enough they came to steal property he worked for, but why beat him to a pulp, it’s senseless,” he said. 
Referring to the incident in which retired school principal Gona Pillay was killed and her husband Logie was assaulted last year, Govender said Silverglen particularly was under siege. 
“We keep losing wonderful, humble, hard-working people who have lived peacefully in their homes for decades and are no threat to anyone. This cannot continue.”

Govender called for police intervention at the highest level, saying Minister Bheki Cele needed to do more for Chatsworth. 
“There needs to be more visibility of police, more patrols around the community, innocent, law-abiding ratepayers cannot be held at ransom in their own homes,” he said. 
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said a cellphone and cash were stolen from the Sukununun home. 
She said cases of house robbery and murder were being investigated. 

The Mercury