Durban - The digital age has brought many offerings that make life a little simpler - including the way we read books. With our hectic schedules, it has become near impossible to find the time to sit down and read a book. Roll on the introduction of reading apps that not only convenience us but also help us escape to different worlds and better refine our use of literature. 

Here is a list of the top 6 apps for book worms, according to http://mediavataarme.com
Amazon Kindle - Amazon kindle enables people to buy, download, and read books, newspapers and magazines. We can also purchase our favourite books instantly without rushing to the markets stores.
Hubhopper - Being India’s largest platform for podcasts and publishers, Hubhopper is a must have app for the busy readers. It offers easy - passive content across popular genres like health, education, history, business, technology, sports, etc. A leading provider of podcast exclusive content from over 2000+ channels, it enables you to listen to your favorite books and topics of interest whilst you are busy with the daily chores. The Hubhopper app saves users time, effort and space on their devices by bringing together all the content they love from their favorite publishers under one unified experience. It's the daily dose user’s need today.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Goodreads - One of the most renowned platforms for book lovers, Goodreads can help you read and connect with your friends at the same time. While sharing your reviews, you can even see what your friends are reading. You can also make your friend group on the app to connect with each other.

SwipeSpeare - This is one of the most helpful apps for all the Shakespeare lovers, especially for the new readers and young students. This app can be very helpful if you find difficulty with language in terms of the different phases of English literature.
Wattpad - If you are confused about what to read and what not, Wattpad can help you with countless options. It has content from genres across fiction, horror, drama, suspense, thriller, romance, poetry and many more. You can also share your favorite reads with your friends through this app.
Grammarly - If you are polishing on your writing skills, Grammarly is the perfect app for you. It also has an AI based grammar checker to help you proofread your content. This app can be used to correct writing errors on all of the devices. The paid version of this app picks up advanced errors like subject-verb agreement and modifier placement.