Durban - An organisation supporting women in engineering has started a petition, to remove the chief executive of South African Institution of Civil Engineering (Saice) after his “derogatory, condescending and patronising,” article.

The petition, started on www.gopetition.com, calls for the removal of Manglin Pillay who said in his article that women did not occupy high-profile executive positions because they chose to dedicate their time to raising children.
“We demand Saice to set an example by removing Manglin Pillay as their CEO and sending a message to the engineering industry that discrimination of any type will not be tolerated and if the sector truly believes in transformation, they will set the precedent,” read the petition.
Related ArticlesCEO’s sexist views outrage
Pillay had also questioned how a woman had to work twice as hard as her male counterpart.

A recent study commissioned by Mercantile Bank,  found that 67% of female business owners surveyed in the construction sector face business challenges because of their gender. Half of the female entrepreneurs surveyed in this sector also feel that there is not enough support for women owned businesses.
More than 150 female entrepreneurs who own at least 51% of their business in the retail and wholesale, construction, manufacturing and professional services were surveyed.
Dalene Sechele-Manana, head of specialised markets at Mercantile, said the number of female business owners in the construction sector who face gender-specific challenges is significantly higher than in other sectors. “Media reports have drawn attention to issues around gender in the civil engineering industry, but Mercantile found that this also extends to female entrepreneurs within the construction space. All entrepreneurs face challenges, but this means that female business owners also have to overcome additional barriers.”
In creating an environment conducive to growing small and medium-sized businesses, Sechele-Manana said this not only meant addressing challenges like access to finance and skills, but also boldly addressing challenges like gender discrimination.

The Mercury