Durban - A police officer has found himself on the wrong side of the law and is due appear in the Durban Magistrate's Court on a charge of corruption on Thursday. 

The officer, a detective constable based at the Sydenham police station, was charged by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) on Wednesday. 
According to Ipid spokesperson, Moses Dlamini, the officer demanded R10 000 from a resident in exchange for making a case go away. 
Related ArticlesKZN cops charged for torture, murder"It is alleged that the complainant was being investigated for a fraud case which had been withdrawn in court for lack of evidence. The suspect threatened to resuscitate the case and demanded the bribe in return for making the case disappear permanently," Dlamini said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He said the complainant reported the extortion to Ipid and the officer was arrested when he tried to collect the money he had demanded.

Meanwhile, three police officers who were arrested after an alleged suspect in their custody was tortured to death, are due back in court on August 22 for a formal bail application. 
The officers, a detective based at Muden and policemen from the Crime Intelligence Unit in Greytown, appeared in the Greytown Magistrate's Court on charges of murder, assault gbh and defeating the ends of justice. They were arrested after the family member of the deceased complained that he had not returned home after being taken by police. 
According to Dlamini, the man and two others had been picked up by the officers and allegedly detained and tortured in the Muden police station holding cells on August 2. 
Dlamini said one of the alleged suspects succumbed to his injuries and the officers reportedly orchestrated a plan to dispose of the body by dumping it in bushes nearby. The officers also failed to report the matter to their seniors, Dlamini added. A fourth police officer implicated in the case, committed suicide at his uncle's home. 

Daily News