Durban - eThekwini Municipality has lost any hope of recouping more than R145 million owed by the Ingonyama Trust for rates and utilities, after talks with the board fell flat.
Government departments and parastatals also have municipal debt as they own a number of properties in the municipality that are valued and rated accordingly. However, in a meeting with the city’s executives on Tuesday, a report tabling the parastatals’ debts showed that some government departments followed long processes of appealing against the initial valuations, which resulted in a massive amount owed to the city.
According to the report presented by eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede, the Ingonyama Trust debt has surpassed 90 days in arrears. 
“The matter of Ingonyama Trust has been ongoing for many years,” the report stated. 
After numerous attempts to recover the money, the municipality decided to follow intergovernmental dispute resolution processes. The report revealed that the consultation process did not yield any results, and it will now be re- commended to the city’s legal department to take the matter further. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Ingonyama Trust spokesperson Simphiwe Mxakaza said he could not comment on the matter as it was above his jurisdiction, and referred The Mercury to Judge Jerome Ngwenya. 
The judge did not answer numerous calls made to him or respond to text messages.
The DA’s Heinz de Boer said the matter regarding the Ingonyama Trust should have been concluded many years ago, when a high-level dispute resolution team intervened. 
“We call in these dispute re- solution teams and you think it is all going to be over, but it all just disappears into the mists of time. Parastatals should be treated the same way in which we treat a resident and cut them off,” he said.

De Boer said the city had extremely strict debt-collecting measures for ordinary residents and business owners but they lacked the same vigour in collecting the debt owed by government departments.
“We can’t penalise the ordinary citizen, who is trying really hard to make their payments, and not do the same to parastatals,” he said.
The National Ports Authority (NPA), Transnet and the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) were also listed as defaulters in the report, owing more than R60m collectively.
The NPA and Transnet Freight Rail owe about R14.4m. The NPA raised the issue of the properties in question not being on its fixed registers, and those properties have been classified as “unconfirmed properties”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Real estates are busy with the investigation of these unconfirmed properties. Initially, this exercise was going to be finalised by the end of the financial year, but due to objections, this exercise was not finalised by the due date,” the report stated. 
Transnet Property owes around R5m, but after its unsuccessful objection against the valuation of the old airport, Transnet appealed against the decision. 
The report states, however, that although it appealed against the decision, Transnet signed an agreement to pay the outstanding amount over an extended period.
Prasa owes the city more than R30m but raised a number of objections related to the classification of stations on the railway lines as “commercial” even though there was no commercial activity there. 

The city’s report states that their real estate department was supposed to finalise those objections by the end of the financial year, but failed to do so.
DA councillor Nicole Graham said the report provided “very vague detail” of the actual recovery attempts made by the city. 
She also requested that the city’s real estate department be looked into “because there are a number of outstanding reports that should have been compiled by them”.
The Mercury