Durban - Dozens of people joined the People Against Petrol and Paraffin Price Increases (Papppi) march to the Durban City Hall on Monday, calling for the government to halt all future fuel price increases.
The group have called on President Cyril Ramaphosa to put a stop to all future fuel increases until they conclude their negotiations with the ­Department of ­Energy.
They handed a memorandum to eThekwini deputy mayor Fawzia Peer to pass on to Ramaphosa.
Papppi convener Visvin Reddy said the nationwide protest was scheduled after they had halted talks with the government last month.
Reddy said that while they had been in talks with the Office of the Presidency last month, another fuel hike had been implemented, causing them to halt negotiations.

“We were eventually referred to the Department of Energy to continue our talks, but we will not be negotiating with the government until President Ramaphosa announces that all future­ increases will be halted,” Reddy said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
A small group of people gathered at the King Dinu­zulu Park armed with placards and loud hailers, and called for people to hoot to show their support for the cause.
Coffin
A white hearse was also parked on the roadside with its doors raised, revealing a coffin inside. The coffin was covered with posters calling for the fuel price to be reduced.

“This basically depicts how the price of fuel is killing us,” Reddy said. 
Speaking to the media on the sidelines of the protest, Reddy said fuel price increases affected everyone regardless of whether or not they owned a vehicle.
“The charges for using public transport increase as well as food prices. Almost everything we use or need is affected by the increases in the fuel price. How do you expect the people of South Africa to live?” he asked.
One of the protesters, ­Jo-Ann Bridger, said that the fuel price increases were putting her out of pocket every month.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We have to use the roads everywhere we go, and for everything that we do. Even if we don’t use our own vehicles, we have to use public transport,” Bridger said. 
“The food prices have gone up, and we are older now and can’t support ourselves as we are no longer working. These crazy increases have a ripple effect on everything in our lives.” 
She added that before the recent increases, the prices of food and electricity were already increasing, but this year had hit her purse the hardest with the increase in VAT and fuel costs. 
Nondumiso Khanyile said that taxi fares had increased but her salary did not, leaving her without other necessities at month’s end. “I have to use more money to travel now, and honestly it’s money I don’t have. The government needs to think of us because we are not earning what they are earning. We not poor, but as middle-class South Africans we also suffer,” Khanyile said.

While several political parties had been invited to be part of the protest, only Black First Land First and the lesser-known National Peoples Ambassadors attended.
“Other political parties ignored our invitation. Come next year’s general elections they will come to ask you for a vote. Don’t vote for them unless they tell you what they have done to pressure Ramaphosa to lower the petrol price,” said Bishop Bheki Ngcobo, Papppi’s deputy chairperson.
Bishop Sandile Ndlela said: “We have experienced a low turnout at our church services because congregants cannot afford to drive or commute to because of the exorbitant petrol price. They cannot even ­afford the offering.” 
The Mercury