King Goodwill Zwelithini is planning to sue MiWay insurance company over a leaked audio recording of a conversation he had with one of the company’s sales agents.
Theasen Pillay, an attorney appointed by the king to handle the matter, confirmed this to The Mercury on Sunday, saying: “Yes, we have been asked to formulate a claim.”

Pillay would, however, not divulge the sum that would be sought in the legal action.

In the recording, an unsuspecting agent calls the king and refers to him as Mr. The king reprimands him, telling him he is the king of the Zulu nation.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The king has maintained that he has no problem with the content of the conversation but wanted to know how it was leaked.

Pillay said the claim comes as the king was not satisfied with the responses he was getting from Miway: “We don’t seem to be getting anywhere in terms of the information we had requested.”

The king had requested information from the insurance company on how the audio was leaked and where the company obtained his cellphone number.

The king also wanted to know how the audio found its way on to social media, how it was downloaded, whether MiWay had reported the matter to the police and what security protocols were in place to prevent the unauthorised copying of protected recordings.

While the company had reached out to the king shortly after the incident, Pillay said the discussions between the two parties had now broken down as the king felt the company had no regard for the sanctity of private information.

“His majesty is of the view that the deliberate lack of transparency by MiWay is offensive, degrading and wholly disrespectful to the monarch and that MiWay’s improper business activities must be publicly condemned and investigated further.”

The matter is also being probed by the Information Regulator, a body empowered to monitor and enforce compliance with the Protection of Personal Information Act and the Promotion of Access to Information Act.

In a letter from MiWay CEO René Otto to the Regulator on February 13, the company says a “rogue” employee may have unlawfully provided a journalist with the audio, which the latter tweeted.

“We can confirm that the audio file was definitely not sent out via MiWay’s e-mail systems as we have fully examined our e-mail in and out tracking and there is no evidence of the file leaving MiWay,” the company states in the letter, adding that only selected users are able to export a recording.

In the same letter, MiWay says it had obtained the king’s cellphone number from Blue Label Data, its analytical data partner, but since the incident the king’s information has been removed from the company’s database.

Otto on Sunday expressed disappointment about the litigation threat and about statements attributed to the king and his attorney on this matter.

“We made a sincere formal apology and a generous offer in good faith to attempt to reach an amicable settlement, not as an admission of liability, but out of respect for Zulu culture and customs.

“It seems that our offer has been rejected.”

He said the company would continue to engage with the king through his attorney.

“We have not received formal notice of litigation.

“If and when we do, we will respond appropriately. Our legal advice is that we did not break any laws or attracted any legal liability,” Otto said.

The Mercury