The newly formed Federation For Radical Economic Transformation (FFRET) has vowed to defend eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede against what the it says is an onslaught from enemies of radical economic transformation.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The federation said the mayor is a champion of radical economic transformation.

“Clearly there is an onslaught against the mayor and we want to state it categorically that this Federation is standing by the mayor. We are combat ready. Anyone who wants to touch the mayor must know that we are a wall and they will have to go through us,” said FFRET spokesperson Robert Ndlela.

The federation said Gumede and the deputy city manager for economic development Phillip Sithole were among the few people who support radical economic transformation at the city. They said there have been attacks directed at the mayor and claimed that these started the minute she expressed support for RET.

Malusi Zondo, the secretary general of the federation said there were some officials at the municipality who were opposed to radical economic transformation and those who were not implementing the city’s transformation policies because of bribes.

“Officials accept brown envelopes and do no implement policies. They must know that they are failing RET. We are going to name and shame those officials opposed to radical economic transformation.  They are fighting to settle scores and playing games for their personal agendas. The pockets of these officials are now full they must go away,” Zondo said.

The federation is advocating for black owned businesses to get priority when it comes to the awarding of contracts. Its affiliates include the Delangokubona Business Forum whose members have been accused of stopping some of the developments in the city.

But the leadership of the federation refuted these claims saying it has never stopped any projects but had in fact intervened where there were conflicts to ensure that those in fact continue.

Some of the things that the federation is advocating for is to for blacks to have an ownership stake in township malls and for BEE and BBBEE policies to be reviewed to ensure that they give preference to  black owned businesses.
The Mercury