Durban- An uMhlanga family has been left traumatised after armed robbers threatened to burn one of their children during a home invasion.

The parents and their four children were sleeping in their Somerset Park home when six men armed with firearms and knives forced their way into the house on Wednesday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Ward councillor Heinz de Boer of the DA said the incident was especially disappointing as the suburb was in the final stages of setting up neighbourhood patrols.

Marshall Security arrived at the home just before 5am after the family members managed to free themselves and press their panic button.

Spokesperson Kyle van Reenen said the family members had all been tied up with shoelaces before being locked up in a bedroom.

The robbers had confronted them at gun and knife-point, de­manding to know where their valuables were.

According to Marshall Security, the robbers threatened to burn one of the children if they did not provide information as to where their valuables were kept.

They then ransacked the home, stealing flat-screen televisions, cellphones, a safe containing a firearm, jewellery and an undisclosed amount of cash before making off with the family’s two Mercedes-Benz cars.

“An attempt to steal the homeowner’s double-door fridge failed and it was found abandoned on the property.”

Fortunately, one of the vehicles stolen was fitted with a satellite tracking device and was recovered in KwaMashu.

“Although no physical injuries were sustained, the family were left traumatised and the assistance of the Durban North uMhlanga Crisis Team was sought to counsel them,” said Van Reenen.

Escalating crime

De Boer said the community of Somerset Park had recently formed a “very effective” neighbourhood watch and was in the final stages of getting patrols going.

“In the last six months we’ve seen massive action by our ­communities; they are really playing their part and taking responsibility for their own safety ­ and security,” De Boer said.

This mass mobilisation, he said, was in response to home invasions and house robberies in the area.

Haden Searles, the chairperson of the Durban North/uMhlanga Community Policing Forum, under which the Somerset Park Neighbourhood Watch falls, said they were almost ready to start street patrols before the robbery.

He said that neighbourhood watches had proven very effective, with crime having been reduced by as much as 95% in Prestondale.

“It’s about having a community presence out there and squeezing out criminals. I believe in this particular incident the suspects were at the house for an hour - that’s a long time of trauma for that family.

“It’s one thing to have your home burgled when you’re not there, but it’s a huge invasion and one of the most despicable things to be held in your own house.”

He said he was confident there would be a reduction in crime once the patrols were up and running.

De Boer said the residents were having to make efforts to protect themselves against escalating crime, as the Durban North police station lacked resources.

“The Durban North policing area needs more manpower and vehicles for active patrols. The DA has raised the issue a number of times to provincial levelThis is one of the premier tourist and residential areas in the province and it needs to be policed properly.”

Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said a case of robbery was being probed.

No arrests had yet been made.
The Mercury