The African Independent Congress (AIC) is demanding that the long-awaited relocation of Matatiele from the Eastern Cape back to KwaZulu-Natal should be completed by the end of May.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The party is taking a hard line on the matter, saying the deadline will be not moved.

It fears that there are “forces” in the EC working to sabotage the process.

Public hearings were held in the EC and KZN over the past two weeks to discuss the matter with community members.

The meeting held in the EC was led by the province’s legislature last month.

The KZN legislature also had its public hearing last weekend in Kokstad.

The AIC, which was formed primarily to fight the relocation of Matatiele to the EC a few years ago, said it was unhappy with how the public hearings in the EC were handled.

It said very few people were allowed to speak and those who spoke seemed to have been carefully selected.

“We are waiting for the amendment bill to come through to amend the constitution and begin the process to move Matatiele back to the administration of KZN.

“The deadline for this process is April or May and we are not moving from that deadline,” said AIC president Mandla Galo.

“We do not believe that this process should be difficult. We have already told the government that they should base the decision on the results of the referendum that was conducted in 2009, that showed that many people in Matatiele, especially those living in the rural areas, wanted to go back to the administration of KZN,” he said.

He said the situation was already getting acrimonious as evidenced when the KZN legislature held their meeting and were denied a venue in Matatiele.

He said the meeting had to be held in Ebongweni Youth Centre in Kokstad.

“The (KZN) legislature provided 10 taxis, which was not enough as Matatiele is a large area with about 27 wards. We spoke to the Drakensberg Taxi Association who provided us with more than 50 taxis,” he said.

Galo warned that the AIC has an agreement with the ANC at national level about the issue and should the ANC fail to assist with the relocation of Matatiele from the Eastern Cape to KZN, there would be political consequences for the ANC.

ANC provincial secretary in the EC, Lulama Ngcukaitobi, said the AIC’s claims that the public participation process was manipulated were unfounded.

“The public consultations is an important step of this process, as it is ultimately the people of Matatiele who will decide where they want to belong to,” he said.

Attempts to get comment from the KZN delegation that hosted the meeting were unsuccessful on Sunday.
The Mercury