Durban - Opposing members of the ANC hurled insults at one another as a councillor appeared in court on charges of murdering a comrade.
Msunduzi councillor Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu and five other men appeared before magistrate Ashin Singh in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court yesterday for what was supposed to be their bail hearing.
They are accused of murdering ANC activist Musawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu in May.
Mchunu, a former Msunduzi councillor, was killed after he raised issues relating to corruption in the municipality. 
The men were expected to make a formal bail application yesterday, but this was postponed to October 11 with Singh saying the hearing could not go ahead because the defence was not ready. 

Representatives of the accused said the adjournment was to allow them to appoint senior counsel to represent all the accused.
Security was tight in and outside the courtroom as it was feared tensions between the two opposing groups - supporting the accused and the slain activist - could flare up.
The courtroom was packed with supporters and family of the slain activist.
The defence argued that two of the accused should be examined by a private doctor because they alleged they were tortured by the police.

This request was granted by the magistrate, but he refused another one by the defence to have particulars of the case presented to the accused.
Mohammed Beni, representing some of the accused, had argued that because they were facing schedule six offences they needed to be furnished with particulars, especially regarding the charge of conspiracy to commit murder. 
All are charged with conspiracy to commit murder and premeditated murder. 
Gambu is accused number one and also faces additional charges of the unlawful possession of a firearm and ammunition. 

Also charged are Skhanyiso Zimu, Sifiso Mbele, Mlungisi Zimu, Ayanda Ngubane and Gift Zungu.
Singh declined the request for the particulars of the allegations to be made available to the defence because he said the matter was not at the stage where the case was being argued.
He said: “Let us not lose sight here of the fact someone has died Life is precious and that is what dictates how this matter will be dealt with.”
Singh also said the rights of the accused were protected by the Constitution and he would not be swayed by outside interference.

Meanwhile, the man accused of murdering former ANC Youth League secretary-general Sindiso Magaqa has abandoned his bail application. 
The man, who is not being named, appeared under heavy police guard at the Umzimkhulu Magistrate’s Court yesterday. 
Outside, supporters dressed in ANC regalia hoisted placards demanding that the suspect be denied bail. 
Magaqa - a PR councillor at Umzimkhulu Local Municipality - was shot in July last year and died in September because of complications from multiple gunshot wounds. 

The case was adjourned to October 25. - Additional reporting African News Agency (ANA)
The Mercury