Durban - A Grade 12 pupil has been charged with assault after he stabbed a 15-year-old Grade 9 pupil with a pair of scissors at Isipingo High School two weeks ago.
KwaZulu-Natal SAPS spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said the 17-year-old had been charged for assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm.
The mother of the Grade 9 pupil said her son had been walking in front of a group of four boys when one of them stopped him, swore at him and accused him of bumping into him.
“My child just looked at him and carried on walking down the steps. The boy punched him behind his head, picked him up by his legs, threw him and booted him,” she said.
She added that when her son tried to pick up something to defend himself with, he was stabbed above the eye.

“The boy stabbed him with the scissors above his eye, and tried to stab him in his chest as well. He also continued punching him,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
When the mother arrived at the school, she said her son was sitting on a chair, bleeding, and had not received medical attention.
“I am so terrified I can’t even eat, I can’t sleep, I just keep imagining what happened at the school. I can’t handle this, because I feel I could have lost him,” she said. 
It is understood that the pupil has been suspended, but will be allowed to sit for the trial examinations.

Elijah Mhlanga, the spokesperson for the Department of Basic Education, said such violence was condemned because it interrupted the life of the victim, who had to deal with physical pain and mental stress while trying to recover. 
“We need to deal with the perpetrator and put in place disciplinary measures that demonstrate that the department will not tolerate this type of behaviour,” said Mhlanga.
He added that when the perpetrator was in Grade 12, careful consideration had to be given to the type of punishment because the pupil would be leaving the school soon.
“In a situation like this, we consider the circumstances very carefully, working with the parents of that pupil to find out the circumstances that may have led to that behaviour,” said Mhlanga.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The aim, said Mhlanga, was not to destroy the pupil, but to “correct them and show them that violence does not benefit anyone”.
The pupil will appear in court on Wednesday.
The Mercury