DURBAN - A MAN whose wife and two daughters were murdered in their Phoenix flat had worked night shift before he made the gruesome discovery on Friday, hours after his shift had ended.
He was unable to get inside his home after work and went to sleep at his mother’s house nearby. He later returned, climbed over a balcony, entered through a window and found the bodies.
This is according to police and many neighbours who gathered around the Tashveer Gardens complex in the suburb of Longcroft comprising neat two-storey buildings, and decorated with palm trees.
The father, Sagren Govindsamy, only managed to tell The Independent on Saturday: “I was at work, at Industrial Park,” before being whisked away by a supporter, who said: “Not now, not now.”
Another resident, Shaniel Goutham, said he had been told Govindsamy had worked until 10pm on Thursday.

Police spoke to Govindsamy while still at the scene.

 
 
  Police forensic teams were combing a Phoenix home after a triple murder of a mother and daughters in Longcroft Drive yesterday. 
 

A sombre crowd gathered at the flat as police combed the scene and, at one point, removed a body, covered on a stretcher, prompting a wave of weeping as it passed where close family members were seated.
People who commented on the Phoenix Crime Watch Facebook page questioned how three murders in a flat could have happened so silently.

“Those flats have so thin walls how could no one hear a thing,” wrote Saiyesh Prean Barratt.
Pandhari Aryan added: “Nobody heard a thing?? Three people murdered SILENTLY?? Beggars belief! Each flat has multiple apartments in it too.”
Many called for the government to reintroduce the death sentence rather than legalise dagga.
“Seems like crime is part of our heritage we really don’t need this,” wrote Clive Chetty. The country celebrates Heritage Day on Monday.

A neighbour who would not be named said she had been phoned at the supermarket where she worked to be told of the tragedy. She had no idea of the incident when she left for work in the morning.
“They were humble people. The one daughter had finished school, the other was still at school and the mother worked,” she said.
“They were very quiet. They didn’t interfere with anyone else’s business.”
Two of the women were found first and the third was thought to be missing until she was found later yesterday, dead from stab wounds, in a cupboard.

It was alleged all three were gagged.
Police have not yet officially named the women. Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said on Friday no arrests had been made and police had no idea of the motive. “We are waiting for the results of forensic investigations,” he said.
However, police made an arrest on Saturday.
Locals also spoke about Tashveer Gardens having good security. Roy Naidoo commented on Facebook: “Sad news. I lived in Longcroft 20 years ago and it was peaceful why this thing happening now RIP to the deceased.”

 INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY