Durban - The family of Constable Mbiko Buthelezi who was killed in the line of duty in KwaMashu two weeks ago has expressed relief at the news that three people suspected of killing him have also been killed.
“Although it is not going to bring my brother back, it is of some relief that the criminals have gotten the taste of their own medicine. The pain inflicted on my brother has also been inflicted on them,” said Nano Buthelezi, the sister of the deceased.
She said the family, including the 36-year-old’s three children, were still trying to come to terms with his death.
The suspects were killed by police in two separate incidents on Saturday and Tuesday. The cases are now being investigated by the Independent Police Investigation Directorate (Ipid) which probes crimes against the police.
Related Articles‘Alter law to protect the police’Family ‘at a loss’ after cop killedIpid spokesperson Moses Dlamini said two people were killed on Saturday when a team comprising the Hawks and the provincial task team went to KwaMashu in search of the suspects involved in killing of Buthelezi.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“They approached a house at Block 44 KwaMashu Hostel in Ntokozo Road and cornered the suspects. It is alleged they identified themselves as police and that on opening the door, the suspects fired shots in the direction of the police, who returned fire, fatally wounding two suspects. Four suspects were arrested and detained at KwaMashu SAPS. Two firearms were recovered next to the deceased.”
On Tuesday the team went to Ulundi C Section in pursuit of another suspect. “It is alleged that when the SAPS members entered the house where the suspect was hiding he pulled out a firearm and one member fired one shot fatally wounding the suspect.
Speaking on Sunday at an event to commemorate officers who lost their lives in the line of duty, Police Minister Bheki Cele said: “Anybody who kills an officer must run and run but know very well they will be found by us. And I’m calling on all police, don’t be kind when you find police killers.”
The Mercury