Durban - Today Police Minister Bheki Cele will visit the University of Zululand where a student was stabbed to death, sparking a mob beating that left the alleged killer, also a student, seriously injured. 
The incidents happened on Sunday at the university’s eSipheto residence on the KwaDlangezwa campus where, according to police, a 20-year-old student died after being stabbed in the neck. 
Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said the alleged killer was assaulted, reportedly by other students, and was in hospital under police guard.
He faces a charge of murder. 
UniZulu spokesperson Gcina Nhleko-Mdluli yesterday said the fatal stabbing was reportedly a result of an argument between the two students. 

She said the university was providing counselling to those affected. 
The incident comes after another student residence stabbing, at the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Westville campus, on Saturday. 
In connection with that incident, Sibongiseni Dladla, 20, appeared in the Pinetown Magistrate’s Court yesterday, charged with the murder of fellow student Nkanyiso Dhlomo, 22. 
Dressed in flops, jeans and a jacket, Dladla stood in the dock with his hands behind his back as magistrate Ruphas Makhanya read him his rights to legal representation. 

Dladla told the court he wanted to conduct his own defence. 
Makhanya warned that this required more than knowing the facts.
“Even though the court can assist you, it will not represent you and you will have to be conversant in the provisions of the (Criminal Procedure) act. This court is not concerned with whether you are guilty or not, but whether you are a suitable candidate for bail in terms of the act. I’m not sure you will be able to deal with that,” said Makhanya. 
Dladla then elected to be represented by Legal Aid. 

State prosecutor Veraysha Moodley asked the court for a seven-day remand for the bail application and said the State would oppose bail. 
She also asked that Dladla be kept at the Westville police station cells so investigators could verify his alternative address, because the university had suspended him after his arrest and he therefore could not live at the student residence. 
Dladla is expected back in court next Tuesday. 
Both universities had also committed to conduct internal probes regarding the incidents.

“The university abhors violence of any sort to resolve conflict and is especially opposed to the use of force and violence on campuses. This constitutes a fundamental violation of the hard-won constitutional right of the sanctity of human life,” said Nhleko-Mdluli.
Department of Higher Education and Training spokesperson Lunga Ngqengelele said Minister Naledi Pandor had asked the department to finalise a draft policy on violence, to help institutions of higher learning to better deal with such issues. 
He said Pandor was also looking to the Council on Higher Education and Universities of South Africa to advise her on what was needed to better protect students and staff. 
The Mercury