Durban - The cash-strapped Msunduzi Municipality has arrived at a settlement with a former senior manager and agreed to pay him more than R1million after a protracted battle in the SA Local Government Bargaining Council. 
Former Msunduzi municipal manager for infrastructure and services, Sabatha Nomnganga, said he had finally been set free and his name cleared of all allegations against him. 
Nomnganga has been on suspension since July last year. He was suspended on allegations that he authorised a R750 000 payment to a company, and spent about R5m on a smart meter project, but failed to ensure the work was completed.
He was eventually dismissed in absentia via a council resolution last month. 
He maintained that he was suspended and eventually fired because he refused to be “part and parcel of looting” that was taking place in the municipality, and for refusing to take “illegal instructions”.

Speaking to The Mercury yesterday, Nomnganga said the municipality had failed to prove the allegations it levelled against him, and by proposing the settlement “they basically knew they had no case”.
He said he was presented with the settlement agreement at the bargaining council this week. 
The Mercury has seen the settlement agreement, which was signed on Tuesday. 
“After fears for the safety of my family and the tension we went through, I am glad it has finally reached proper closure with Msunduzi,” he said. 

He was only informed of the charges against him 10 months into his suspension. 
“The damage that was done to my reputation is irreversible. It was unethical to be falsely charged and kept on suspension for as long as I was. I was not going to take this lying down, but I was also very wary as the political killings in the province were on the rise then,” he said.
With 20 years of experience, Nomnganga said he would be weighing his options for future employment. 
Msunduzi municipal spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said the municipality would not comment on the settlement agreement as it was an employer-employee matter.

“It would not be fair to Mr Nomn­ganga and to the municipality to do so,” she said. 
The Mercury