Durban - Six men accused of killing ANC activist Musawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu in May, appeared at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate's Court on Thursday.

While they were meant to make a formal bail application but this was postponed with Magistrate Ashin Singh pointing out that the hearing could not go ahead because the defence was not ready. Representatives of the accused said this was to allow them to appoint senior counsel to represent all six accused.
The date for the next hearing was yet to be announced as the court took an adjournment to allow the defence and the prosecution to agree on a suitable date.
Related ArticlesWATCH: Tensions high as seven due in court for KZN councillor's murderThe courtroom was packed with supporters and family of the slain activist while heavily armed police kept a watchful eye.
The defence argued that two of the accused should be examined by a private doctor as they alleged that they were tortured by police.

This request was granted by the magistrate but he refused another request by the defence to have particulars of the case presented to the accused.
Mohammed Beni, representing some of the accused, had argued that because the accused were facing schedule six offences they need to be furnished with particulars especially regarding the charge of conspiracy to commit murder.
All six are charged with conspiracy to commit murder and premeditated murder. Accused number one in the matter is ANC councillor, Nkosinathi Gambu, who also faces additional charges of the unlawful possession of a firearm and  that of the unlawful possession of ammunition.
Charged alongside Gambu are Nkanyiso Zimu, Sifiso Mbele, Mlungisi Zimu, Ayanda Ngubane and Gift Zungu.

Magistrate Singh declined the request for the particulars of the allegations saying the matter was not at the stage where the case was being argued.
However Singh warned that life was precious and this indicated how the matter should be dealt with. 
"Let us not lose sight here the fact is someone has died," he said. 
Singh said the accused’s rights are protected by the constitution. He also said the court will not be guided by any outside interference.

The Mercury