Durban - Four suspected hijackers are set to make their first appearance in court this week. The men were nabbed for two separate incidents in Durban. 

According to KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbele, the men are aged between 21 and 26-years-old.
In the first incident, on Wednesday night, just after 8pm, the Provincial Vehicle Task Team, K9 Unit and members from a car tracking company were following up on information regarding a hijacking in Glenwood. 
Mbele said, the victim was parked outside his house in Glenwood when he was accosted by three armed suspects travelling in a Toyota Corolla. 
"At gunpoint they robbed him of his Mercedes Benz and fled the scene. The team spotted the vehicle at V Section along Sandakahle Drive in Umlazi. Police intercepted the vehicle and the suspects opened fire at police officers, who fired back," she said. 

Mbele said the suspects alighted from the cars and fled on foot.
"Investigations were conducted and a 26-year-old suspect was arrested whilst he was being conveyed to hospital. It is alleged that he sustained a gunshot wound during the shoot-out. Two more suspects aged 21 and 26 who were conveying the injured suspect were also placed under arrest," she said. 
In a separate incident on Thursday morning, a 26-year-old was arrested by police for an alleged hijacking in Mayville. 
According to Mbele, the victim was dropping off a friend in  Silverwillow Road in Mayville when they were accosted by three armed men. 

"At gunpoint, they were forced into the vehicle and the suspects fled with them towards Umlazi," said Mbele. 
She said police officers from the Trio Crimes Task Team, K9 Unit, Durban TRT and other units responded to the complaint. 
The hijacked vehicle, a white Range Rover, was stopped at B Section in Umlazi. 
"Two suspects managed to flee the scene on foot, however, a 26-year-old suspect was placed under arrest. The victims were not injured."

Mbele said the men are expected to appear in the Umlazi Magistrate's Court. 
Daily News