Durban - More arrests are imminent in the triple murder of Phoenix mother Jane Govindasamy and her daughters Denisha and Rackelle.
Colin Pillay, 45, appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court yesterday on three counts of murder. The State revealed that more arrests could follow as the investigation unfolded.
It also emerged in court that Pillay claimed he had an alibi for the night the murders were committed.
However, police investigators said they would need to verify the alibi before Pillay’s formal bail application next Wednesday. 
Related Articles#TripleMurder: Grieving fiancé shares emotional messageBREAKING: Police arrest suspect known to family in Phoenix #TripleMurderPhoenix #TripleMurder: KZN detectives lauded for quick arrest#TripleMurder: Shocked neighbours say they heard nothing#TripleMurder: Grieving fiancé shares emotional messageBREAKING: Police arrest suspect known to family in Phoenix #TripleMurderPhoenix #TripleMurder: KZN detectives lauded for quick arrest#TripleMurder: Shocked neighbours say they heard nothing12Court proceedings were delayed after Pillay had an anxiety attack in the holding cells, shortly before he was due to appear before Magistrate Irfaan Khalil. 

He claimed to have a heart condition. However, none of Pillay’s family were present in court to confirm this. State prosecutor San Bhartu told the court that paramedics had been called in to treat Pillay. He was placed on an intravenous drip for half an hour and refused hospital treatment.
When Pillay was eventually brought to the dock, dressed in jeans, a multi-coloured shirt and grey fleece jacket, he did not make eye contact with anyone. 
Husband and father of the victims Sagren Govindasamy sat in the public gallery looking sombre. His sister Thaveshni sat next to him, supporting him when Pillay was brought to the dock.
The gallery was packed to capacity with family, friends and community members who earlier protested outside court, calling for the death penalty to be reinstated.

The State opposed Pillay being granted bail, saying various details needed to be confirmed. Bhartu added police were still waiting on forensic reports, post-mortem reports, phone records and to confirm Pillay’s home address.
Pillay’s attorney Chris Gounden argued that his client was being treated as if he was already on trial. Magistrate Khalil ruled that the formal bail application would take place on October 3.
Gounden requested that Pillay be remanded in custody to an isolated cell at Westville Prison. He claimed that Pillay had been assaulted while at the Phoenix SAPS holding cells. Khalil asked to see the injuries he sustained, and Pillay was asked to open his shirt to reveal red bruises on his chest.
However, Bhartu said the marks were due to paramedics rubbing his chest when he had suffered an anxiety attack earlier. 

Khalil ruled that the media should not photograph or publish any images of Pillay until his bail ruling.
He also ordered that Pillay be sent to Westville Prison instead of being held in police cells.
The Mercury