DURBAN - The government does not care about children in poor schools because top government officials’ children are in “fancy schools”, education guru Jonathan Jansen told the provincial National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of South Africa (Naptosa) conference in Durban.
To illustrate inequality in education, Jansen showed a slide of a poor school beside a picture of a top private school, “30 minutes drive away from one another”.
“You are not going to get this right through the intervention of government,” he told conference delegates at the Tsogo Sun-Elangeni Hotel.
“This government doesn’t give a damn about the education of the poor,” he said, adding this was why “a nameless union” focused on poor schools to cause disruption.
Naptosa is the second-largest teachers’ union in South Africa while the South African Democratic Teachers’ Union (Sadtu) is the largest and affiliated to the Congress of SA Trade Unions (Cosatu), which is a member of the ANC tripartite alliance.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Calling on quality pre-school education to close the gap between children with the hope of achieving later on and those with less hope, Jansen called on the government to “go to where the greatest need is - at pre-schools - and not to go to the universities where they shout the loudest”.
He said that for Grade One learners, the gap between children with a good grounding and no grounding for school was already huge.
“Research shows that over the next 12 years the gap never closes. If you get the foundation years right, you can solve the problems of half a million children before Grade 12.”
He encouraged people to read to young children.

“The habit of reading will stand any child in good stead. Make sure a child is spoken to with real words and full sentences more than baby-talk crap.”
Jansen also praised the role foreign teachers played in education in South Africa.
“They don’t come with baggage,” he said, adding it made a world of difference when teachers had high expectations of pupils rather than allowing them to drop into mediocrity.
The latter had become “part of a messaging system we have come to accept. We can’t”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY