Durban - The opposite of depression, misery, addictions and negative behavioural choices is purpose, connection, acknowledgement and a healthy sense of independence. Imagine if we could teach these valuable life skills to our children, from a very young age and within our home environments. 

Director and Co-founder of Step Up Education Centres, Cindy Glass, says the good news is that you can, and indeed, you should, and it can be done through the teaching of responsibility within your home.
She highlights the following benefits of teaching a healthy sense of responsibility in children. It helps children believe that they are capable and worthy.

 It engenders feelings of achievement and upliftment
 It increases independence, which is a wonderful and necessary life-gift
 It helps increase confidence and leadership skills
 It teaches children the skills that they will need to live more successful adult lives
 It encourages self-awareness, self-regulation, motivation, empathy and social skills



This will also include self-care.
“It is important to note that responsibilities within the home need to be age appropriate. Younger children can be tasked with helping to make their own beds, putting dirty clothes in the wash-basket, packing away toys, brushing their own teeth and hair and other simple-to-do tasks. Older children and teenagers can and should make their own beds and keep their personal space in order. In addition, they can be tasked with helping with cooking, washing dishes, making their own school lunches and doing their own homework.”
There is a fine line between insisting, nagging and fighting with our children to become more responsible and helping them to embrace the process of learning from the experiences of becoming more responsible within their homes. Glass gives the following do’s and don’ts to consider” consider:AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


 Don’t expect or insist upon perfection. Mistakes are inevitable and they are excellent opportunities for learning and problem-solving.
 Do praise, acknowledge, express appreciation and encourage
 Don’t allow excuses. Teach your children to own their choices and actions
 Do set boundaries with consequences that you stick to
 Do set the example of what it is you wish your children to become. They are most likely going to do what you do and not always what you say.


“It is so important to remember that, as parents, you are your child’s first and longest-lasting teacher. Make it count by embracing the need for independence and responsibility. Start within your home. It will not always be easy, but with perseverance, lots of positive encouragement and appreciation, the results will be well worth it," Glass said. 
The Mercury