Durban - There were tears shed at the Verulam Magistrate’s Court on Thursday when it became clear that the three men who are charged with the murders of two children, killed in a rock throwing incident, will only hear the outcome of their bail applications in two weeks. 
Relatives of the men were emotional as Nathan Govender, 27, his father Selvan Govender, 46, and their co-accused Qiniso Bhekithemba Gumbi, 20, walked out of the dock to be taken back to prison after their bail hearing was adjourned.
The trio are accused of the murder of Vereeniging siblings Amina Haffajee, 16, and her brother Abdul Rahim, 7, who died of severe head injuries when a rock was thrown on to the car they were travelling in.
Following the testimony of investigating officer Ivan Padayachee, defence attorney Rajendra Nathalal handed in a photo of the crime scene to show the court that it was a deserted area and about 8km away from the home of the accused. 
Related ArticlesRock Throwing: Investigating officer believes murder accused will interfere with witnessesThree accused in Ballito rock throwing case remanded in custodyTrio request bail, 4th arrest likelyRock Throwing: Investigating officer believes murder accused will interfere with witnessesThree accused in Ballito rock throwing case remanded in custodyTrio request bail, 4th arrest likelyRock Throwing: Investigating officer believes murder accused will interfere with witnesses12However, led by state prosecutor Carlson Govender, Padayachee rebutted this, saying he had driven the route and it was only 3km. 

Nathalal also questioned the motive of the State’s five witnesses - who are minors - as there was a reward offered for information on the incident. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
But, the prosecutor argued that the reward was not offered by police but by the community, which indicated public outrage about rock throwing incidents, which he also said was another reason to refuse bail.
Carlson Govender, also pointed out that the reward had also not been claimed nor mentioned by the witnesses in their statement, so it could not have been their motive. 
Regarding the defence’s claim that this might be a case of mistaken identity, Carlson said the witnesses knew the accused and had interacted with them on the day of the murders. 

In their statements, they had detailed the alleged role played by each of the accused in the crime. 
Since their arrest, the home that Selvan, a mechanic, shared with his son Nathan and employee, Gumbi, had been vandalised and property had been stolen from the house and the lot he used as his auto shop. 
The State argued that this made it more likely that they may evade trial. 
The fact that they were also looking to family to assist with bail money also indicated that it would be easier for them to risk forfeiting it and flee. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

However, the court heard that as their home was uninhabitable, Selvan’s ex-wife had offered to put all three of them up in her home in Margate for the duration of the trial.
Nathalal said it was unreasonable and unjustified to think his clients would leave the home that had been in the Govender family for generations, just because it had been vandalised. 
He also argued that his clients had alibis for the day of the murders. 
A decision on their bail application is expected on September 26. 

The Mercury