Durban - Stormy weather in the Eastern Cape delayed the solar-powered vehicles taking part in the 2018 Sasol Solar Challenge race from entering the province on Heritage Day. 
Designed by university students from around the world, the vehicles began the challenge in Pretoria on September 22 and are scheduled to finish in Stellenbosch on Saturday.
The South African team battled cloudy skies and strong winds, with more of the same forecast.
Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) team member and electrical engineer Tiaan Oosthuizen said:
“The Bloemfontein to Gariep Dam stage was more about strategy than distance for us - and probably for all the teams. The weather wasn't in our favour, and we know that it won't be for the next few days. 

“We had to plan our energy usage very carefully and make sure we've got the power we need for the windy hills to come on the way to Port Elizabeth.” 
Think Bike event captain Sean Funster said: “Day three was an incredibly busy stretch of road, and the Think Bike team had their work cut out for them. 
"When the safety bikes are with the solar car convoy, they're considering the safety of that car, of the whole convoy, of the members of the public and, of course, themselves. 
“They're also taking the team's competitive strategy - which sometimes involves overtaking other convoys - into consideration, as well as language barriers. So, we have to be 100% alert, 100% of the time.”

Heritage Day traffic also played a major role in the teams’ progress, with the Think Bike safety marshals - two of whom escort each team - being tested to the limit.
With only a minute in it, Dutch team Nuon have retaken the lead from the Japanese on the third day of the 2018 Sasol Solar Challenge. Both teams covered an admirable 441.9km but, with a 1-minute late arrival penalty, Tokai started third on the grid yesterday. 
The ever-consistent Swiss team, Solar Energy Racers, started second on the line-up at Gariep Dam’s Forever Resorts yesterday, having covered 360km. 
Yesterday’s stage from Gariep Dam to Graaff-Reinet passed through Middelburg, where Hoërskool Middelburg hosted the controlled stop area.

The Mercury