DURBAN - IT’S all system go for the annual reed dance celebrations in Nongoma after more than 150 buses were declared roadworthy after being inspected by Department of Transport officials in KwaZulu-Natal. 

 

 The buses will ferry thousands of Zulu maidens to the Enyokeni Royal Palace in Nongoma over the weekend.

 

 The department conducted a wide-ranging inspection of the buses that are reserved for maidens who will be travelling to Nongoma from Friday.

 

 KZN Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda along with Principal Provincial Inspector Reyne De Clerk led inspections at the Umdloti Road Traffic Inspection (RTI) centre on Thursday to ensure all maidens travel safety.
AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 

 Department spokesperson Mluleki Mntungwa said traffic officers led would be conducting law enforcement operations on all the roads leading up to the reed dance.

 

 “The integrated traffic operations are focusing on overloading, excessive speeding, drinking and driving, seatbelts, vehicle and driver fitness and roadworthiness."

 

 Mntungwa said buses and minibus taxis inspected were certified roadworthy. 

 

 “More than 150 buses and more than 200 taxis received a green sticker, a sign that they are roadworthy. 
 We rejected 22 buses. More than 300 RTI officers with the assistance of municipalities will be out on all roads leading to Nongoma from Friday,” said Mntungwa.

 

 Scores of maidens are also expected from Mpumalanga, Gauteng and Swaziland to participate in the occassion. 

 

 The Department of Art and Culture said preparations are well underway to host the annual event which is a partnership between the department and The Zulu Royal House.

 

 The department uses the event to educate young girls about the careers available to them as well as to discuss the prevalent socials ills affecting the youth.

 

 Non-schooling maidens will present their reeds to Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini on Friday and the rest of the girls on the following day where King Zwelithini will deliver his main address. 

 

 SUNDAY TRIBUNE