The Duchess of Sussex selected a suitably royal shade of blue when she dressed for a gala concert last night.

Meghan, 37, wore a gown by designer Jason Wu – but the outfit attracted stares for all the wrong reasons. Panels on the front billowed out in front of her, giving the impression of Prince Harry’s wife having a rounded stomach.

 
 
  Meghan's unflattering blue dress. (Picture: REUTERS, POOL, GEOFF PUGH TELEGRAPH MEDIA GROUP LTD.)
 

Meghan was accompanying Harry to 100 Days to Peace, a musical evening in aid of mental health charities.
It was organised by the Royal Armouries to mark the century of the end of the First World War. The couple arrived at Central Hall, Westminster, and were greeted by Lord Dannatt, former head of the Army, who is a trustee of the Royal Armouries.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 
 
  Britain's Duke and Duchess of Sussex, Prince Harry and his wife Meghan, arrive to a gala concert in support of charities for military veterans. (REUTERS, POOL, GEOFF PUGH TELEGRAPH MEDIA GROUP LTD.)
 

He was responsible for Harry’s first tour of Afghanistan and attended the wedding of the prince and Meghan.
The one-off concert was an evening of music and reflection in aid of three charities working to support military veterans facing mental health challenges – Help for Heroes, Combat Stress and Heads Together. Lord Dannatt said he had ‘total admiration’ for the work that Harry has done for fellow military veterans.

 
 
  Britain's Duke and Duchess of Sussex, PrinceÊHarryÊand his wife Meghan, arrive for a gala concert in support of charities for military veterans who face mental health challenges, in London
 

He said: ‘One of the tremendous spin-offs from the two tours that Prince Harry did in Afghanistan, both on the ground and as an Apache pilot, was that he really got to experience and share the same circumstances that everybody else did.
‘I have total admiration for him.’

At a reception during the interval an animated-looking Meghan and Harry met with soprano Lesley Garrett and conductor Sir Karl Jenkins.
© Daily Mail