Durban - A security company owned by Sbu Ncube, the wealthy businessman husband of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube, scored R11 million worth of contracts from Cogta and other provincial departments over the past five years.
This information was voluntarily disclosed by Dube-Ncube yesterday in a bid to counter attempts aimed at besmirching her name over her husband’s business dealings with the government.

In the statement issued by her spokesperson Lennox Mabaso, Dube-Ncube threatened to pursue crimen injuria charges against individuals whom she said were trying to discredit her.
In the statement, Dube-Ncube said she had reliably learnt that “slanderous statements and reports” were being planted by “individuals” in an effort to portray her as someone who had used her position in the government to facilitate her husband’s business affairs.
Mabaso said the names were being kept confidential because a legal process was in motion.
Presently, Ncube is embroiled in a legal tussle with the DA which has in the past made similar claims against his business dealings with some municipalities.

In June, the DA accused Ncube’s company, Brand Partners, of being irregularly awarded tenders worth a combined R15m by the Nkandla and Mthonjaneni municipalities. 
The claims by the DA led to Ncube instituting a R1.5m lawsuit against Zwakele Mncwango, the leader of the DA in KwaZulu-Natal.
Mncwango had accused Dube-Ncube of turning a blind eye to the irregular appointment of under qualified municipal managers at the two municipalities.
It emerged, however, that Dube-Ncube had challenged the appointments in court.

The MEC has always denied influencing the awarding of contracts to companies linked to her husband.
Yesterday, she said the attacks against her always surfaced when there were internal ANC elections or whenever the country was approaching the national elections.
Dube-Ncube claimed her husband’s business dealings with the government had declined since her appointment as MEC.
“The mission to discredit me is as interesting as the omission of my husband’s long-standing business involvement with government and municipalities, which dates back to the time when I had no knowledge that one day I will be the MEC responsible for Cogta and municipalities.”

The Mercury