Durban - The family of a slain ANC regional chairperson for ward 12 in eThekwini said he had been receiving strange phone calls before his death.
Thulani Nxumalo was shot dead outside his KwaNdengezi home on Monday. 
His wife, Makhosi Nxumalo, said her husband had been getting calls from people asking where he was. 
She said the family was aware that about two weeks ago some people had also waited outside Nxumalo’s home waiting for a chance to ambush him, but he had not left the home.
“Even on the day he was killed he received numerous calls from a person who kept on asking where he was. He even switched off the phone because it was disturbing him,” she said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She said her husband had survived an attempt on his life in 2004.
Deputy chairperson of ward 12 Mbongeni Ngwenya said he and other branch members were puzzled by the killing. “There are no problems in the ward, all the comrades are working well together and we have a close working relationship with the ward councillor.”
He described Nxumalo as a peace-loving man who had not deserved to die the way he did.
Nxumalo held the position of community policing forum chair for 10 years.

The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal said Nxumalo had been killed after returning home from a branch executive committee meeting. 
“Although the information regarding his murder remains sketchy, it appears that Nxumalo’s attackers hid around his home and shot him several times on his arrival,” said the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal.
The party said it was “shocked and outraged”, describing Nxumalo’s murder as “brutal, callous, and cold-blooded”. 
As many as 10 prominent ANC members have been murdered in the province this year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We dip our banner in honour of this fallen cadre of our revolution and commit ourselves to pick up his spear and soldier on with the struggle for the betterment of our people’s lives which he waged until his last moments,” said ANC provincial secretary Mdumiseni Ntuli. 
“We would like to assure the family that we are with them during this sad moment of bereavement. We share their grave sense of loss. 
“The ANC remains with them even during these difficult and trying moments.”
Police said a case of murder was being investigated and the motive for the crime was unknown. 

No one has been arrested.
The Mercury