Durban - Consumers need not worry about consuming non-perishable food items beyond their best-before date despite the public outcry that these goods are being sold in stores.
The National Consumer Commission (NCC) has also started a campaign to clamp down on fake and expired food items across the country.
This was the advice from food science and consumer law experts in the wake of claims that small businesses have been selling fake goods and food past their best-before dates.
Consumer law expert and partner at Hahn and Hahn Attorneys Janusz Luterek said the NCC’s clampdown on food - including dry non-perishable goods such as soaps and dry goods - was not scientifically informed, adding it was not illegal to sell goods beyond their best-before date.
Related ArticlesConsumer body to clamp down on fake, expired food

Luterek said the Food Labelling Regulations under the Foodstuffs Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act of 1972 outlined the definitions for the terms “sell by”, “best before” and “use by”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The only “problematic” label was “use by”, he said, because one of the alternative terms for this in the legal definitions was “date of expiry” but this was only applicable to perishable food items such as processed and packaged meat, poultry and fish and ready to eat meals. 
“It wouldn’t be used on maize meal or sugar or a can of baked beans or soft drinks. They’d have a best before date, which simply means that at the point of reaching its best-before date it will still be perfect. Some time after that the quality will start to go down gradually.
“I’ve read some alarmists on Twitter and you’d think that a day after the best-before date someone put a cyanide capsule in it,” Luterek said.

There was no legal grounds for confiscating non-perishable goods past their “best-before” date, often 18 to 24 months after the date of manufacture, he said. “I have no qualms eating a pasta sauce two years after its best-before date as long as it is in a sealed glass jar with a properly sealed lid on. 
“There is no grounds for any health practitioner, police officer or politician to run around scaremongering and confiscating products that are past their best-before date,” Luterek said.
It seemed the NCC was relying on the Consumer Protection Act stating that consumers were entitled to quality goods as grounds for removing the products, he said, even though there was not necessarily a potential health hazard. “The NCC has no technical capacity, they are lawyers and administrators with no scientific background.” 
Luterek said some food products like sugar, chewing gum, products consisting of flavoured and coloured sugars, unpacked dry biltong and dry sausage on a hook, alcoholic beverages and honey did not require best-before dates although they should be labelled with the date of manufacture.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Food Science consultant Nigel Sunley of Sunley Consulting said it was difficult for consumers to understand there was no prohibition in the country’s food law on selling non-perishable food beyond its best-before date.
“A ‘use before’ date is applicable to perishable foodstuff which could be potentially dangerous if consumed after a certain date. But some food could be not as good as when it was produced such as a pack of biscuits after nine months as it will pick up a bit of moisture and go a bit soft and won’t taste as fresh, but it is perfectly safe to eat and those products have a use-by date,” Sunley said.
SA National Consumer Union vice-chairman Clif Johnston also cautioned consumers against listening to fake news on the controversial issue. 
“We are not convinced that consumers have such a serious problem with fake goods. The problem might well be fake news, propagated by suppliers whose sales are being undercut by cheaper, and sometimes genuine, but parallel imports. There is no need to become violent about it,” he said.

The NCC had not responded by time of going to print.
The Mercury