DURBAN - A heartbroken actress from the e.TV drama series Imbewu: The Seed has taken to social media after the death of actress Owethu Enhle Gambushe.
Taking to Facebook to pen a tribute to her friend and fellow cast member, Portia Ncwane, 25, who plays the part of Sli on the drama series, said in Gambushe, she had finally found her long-lost ‘twin sister’.
“Rest in Peace sthandwa sami (my love). There's alot I still want to say to you. I had finally found my twin sister. We just found each other again and now you're gone, I meant every word when I said I like you, because you join in on my weirdness… GOD only takes the best and you were the best sthandwa sami (my love),” she wrote.
Gambushe, 22, died when a car she was travelling in crashed into a wall on Botanic Gardens Road in the Berea, Durban, on the early hours of Saturday morning. Another woman, also believed to be in her 20s, died on the scene of the accident, paramedics said.
A 47-year-old man who had been allegedly driving the BMW they were travelling in, was arrested and charged with culpable homicide and driving under the influence, police said. The man is expected to appear in the Durban Magistrates Court on Monday.

  
  
   September 15 - Two people died and another was injured when a car veered out of control and crashed into a road sign before smashing into a wall along Sydenham Hill Road, before Botanic Gardens Avenue in Essenwood, Durban in the early hours of Saturday morning. Photo: Rescue Care 
  
 
 
  
  
   Imbewu cast members Owethu Enhle Gambushe (deceased) and fellow actress Portia Ncwane.
  
 
Ncwane often shared pictures of her and Gambushe on her social media pages and routinely referred to Gambushe as her twin.

 

Ncwane added that Gambushe’s death was a ‘moment of impact’.
“My theory is that these moments of impact, these flashes of high intensity that completely turn our lives upside down actually end up defining who we are,” she wrote.
“The thing is each one of us is the sum total of every moment that we’ve ever experienced, with all the people we’ve ever known It is these moments that become our history, like our own personal greatest hits of memories that we play and replay in our mind over and over again,” she said.

 @SihleSays
 @SundayTribuneSA
SUNDAY TRIBUNE