Durban - Opposition parties have called on President Cyril Ramaphosa to act against former Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini, after the Constitutional Court today ruled that she is liable for 20% of costs in the South African Social Security Agency debacle. 

Today’s ruling comes after an inquiry was set up last year, to probe whether the minister should be held personally responsible for the costs.
The Concourt also ordered that the Minister of Social development, Chief executive Officer of Sassa and Sassa to pay 80% of the costs.
Inkatha Freedom Party spokesperson on Women and Social Development, Liezl van der Merwe, called the ruling a victory for grant recipient.
“We are pleased that the ConCourt has finally endorsed what we have believed all along - that the Minister is solely responsible for the Sassa grant crisis.

“It is now time for President Ramaphosa to act against this rogue Minister.  The IFP therefore calls on President Cyril Ramaphosa to act decisively and relieve her of her duties as the Minister for Women in the Presidency,” she said.
Van der Merwe said Dlamini has caused the misery of millions of South Africans.
“If President Ramaphosa’s is truly passionate about the plight of the most vulnerable in society and truly committed to building a South Africa where unethical leaders are punished, Minister Dlamini should have no place in his Cabinet,” she said.
Democratic Alliance Shadow Minister of Social Development, Bridget Masango, said Ramaphosa can no longer ignore this fact and would fire her immediately.

Given this damning judgment, President Cyril Ramaphosa must fire Dlamini immediately from her position as Minister of Women in the Presidency. This appointment should not have happened in the first place given that she manufactured the social grants crisis, so she could benefit through the planned extension of the illegal CPS contract," Masango said. 
Social justice advocacy group, OUTA, has also welcomed the ruling. 
OUTA’s Portfolio Manager for Special Projects, Dominique Msibi, said they applaud the Concourt’s impartiality in this matter and its courage in holding this disgraced former minister to account. 
"We hope this ends Dlamini’s career as a flagrant abuser of human rights. We also applaud the Black Sash and Freedom Under Law for seeing this case through," Msibi said.

Daily News