Durban - A significant engineering feature has made it possible for a bridge to be erected across both carriageways over a busy highway in KwaZulu-Natal in a record four days.
Recently, traffic on the N3 from Durban to Pietermaritzburg was diverted for two consecutive weekends to make it possible for a new bridge to be erected at Hammarsdale.
The development of the Keystone Park Light Industrial, Warehousing and Logistics Precinct at Hammarsdale has increased the volume of traffic - especially heavy vehicles - using the intersection of the N3 and MR 385.
The South African National Roads Agency Ltd (Sanral) decided the interchange must be upgraded from a simple diamond interchange to a new semi-parclo (partial clover leaf) free-flow interchange to prevent a back-up of trucks onto the busy N3.
Sanral eastern region project manager Stephné Wilmot said that, given the high volume of traffic using the N3 and the urgent need to construct the intersection as soon as possible to alleviate growing congestion by heavy vehicles, it was decided to use time-saving construction measures.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Ian Jackson, resident engineer at Hatch consulting engineers, said in order to minimise delays, precast beams were used.
“With short to medium-span bridges you basically have three types of decks: cast in-situ; precast beams and deck slab; and a launched deck.
“The cast in-situ is the cheapest, but will entail closing a carriageway for approximately three to four months and diverting both directions of traffic on to the one carriageway and then repeating the procedure for the next deck. So it’s time-consuming and severely affects traffic.
“A launch deck is cost prohibitive because it is expensive to set up the launch yard. The geometrics of the bridge would only allow the launch of two decks. So there are practical and cost constraints.

“A precast beam deck and slab has the least disruption of the traffic - two days in which to place the beams across each carriageway - and is also the most cost effective.”
Jackson said the beams were cast in a specialised casting yard about 5km away from the construction site. The beams were transported to the site with special low-bed vehicles.
As each beam weighs 37tons, a large crane was used to lift and place each beam in position.
It took two days to position 23 beams per deck. Each carriageway was closed during this process as it posed a danger to traffic.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Mercury