Durban - YOU can’t keep a good woman down. Take Thoko Makhubu, for example.
After burglars cleaned out her internet café and community training centre, you might have expected her to quit. But the 54-year-old recovered one of the stolen machines from the thief herself and is determined to start anew.

“I was scared, actually,” Makhubu says of reopening the Community Learning Centre in remote Khula village, inland of the southern tip of iSimangaliso (St Lucia) Wetland Park, “but now I want to bring it back.”
Makhubu is used to overcoming difficulties. Just establishing an internet café in a place where reliable internet connections are thin on the ground takes doing. 

In her professional life Makhubu has shown grit, too. She teaches Grade1 at Ubuhle Bemvelo Primary School in Khula village and is also a teacher and supervisor of the local adult basic education and training centre.
The Mpumalanga-born woman’s internet café adventure started when her granddaughter’s teacher, Hyde Koen, gave her a photocopy machine.

From her garage, Makhubu began a copy shop. Next her son bought her a computer, and the business took off.
She moved to a bigger premises and with the support of iSimangaliso Wetland Park’s Rural Enterprise Accelerator Programme bought five more computers and another copier.

But five months later a thief (or thieves) broke in and took all the computers. It turned out they lived in the very community the internet café had been established to help.
A friend alerted Makhubu that someone was selling computers, and the two went to the man’s home, where they found one of her computers. About then, the thief returned and Makhubu and her fellow sleuth had to beat a retreat. After she raised the alarm, the thief bolted.

Makhubu now hopes to secure more funding to “re-fence the structure and replace what has been stolen”.
She’s back much where she started - with two photocopiers and a laminating machine, operating from her garage. But Makhubu is also wiser and her house is now surrounded by cameras and gates. - Roving Reporters

Sunday Tribune