What does Zingiswa Losi’s appointment as Cosatu president mean for women in politics?
This is a victory for women, mostly women in the working class, who are oppressed and find patriarchy prevalent.
A woman president means that our society is finally ready to recognise that we have a role to play in leadership and can contribute towards the building of society. 
One can only wish, although it is retrospective that the ANC should have realised this at its December elective conference. But that is water under the bridge. 
We appreciate the strides taken by the ANC in all structures but women should be given further responsibility and roles in the movement.


Why are we having these discussions about gender parity when women, for decades, have been at the forefront of the change from an oppressive regime to democracy?AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
One of the biggest mistakes we made was thinking that women leading social issues would equate to women being leaders in society. Living in a patriarchal society, which is subjective in nature, means that you are allowed to do things when it’s convenient.
However, the capacity and ability for women to lead is seldom recognised. Society did not change with the advent of democracy. We got change, but the patriarchy did not change. We are talking about patriarchy in all communities and as it affects all women.

 After 1994, we should have taken our revolution a step further to fight our patriarchal society. We did not do that because we had a number of challenges to address. We need to find a different way to ensure the society we live in actually changes.

Does this apply to the corporate environment?
Patriarchy extends beyond party lines. To be able to change a society we need everyone to be involved. Changing a society includes government, corporates and the religious sector.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The ANC has 50% representation in all structures, but some political parties have not taken that stand. When we go to Parliament or legislature and council, the ANC has gender equality, but this is not reflected by other parties. A united approach is needed to deal with this. Women supporting women is also huge factor.

At last week’s International Telecom Union conference in Durban, much of the focus was on connecting people in rural areas or facing the consequences of 70% of the world’s population living in urban areas. Are youth and women being left behind in this connected world?
The ANC’s resolution on rural development was to minimise the migration from rural to urban areas.

By default, the aim was to develop rural areas and make them as appealing as urban areas. All governments should be able to take connectivity and Internet of Things to rural areas.
When our people are able to get into the small micro and medium enterprises field in rural areas, the economy of that community improves. If we don’t connect them, they will move to urban areas to be employed.

Is the ANC doing enough to promote social cohesion?

The ANC is doing enough, but the challenge is partnerships. You need to have a buy-in from society. The platform created by Premier Willies Mchunu, which includes Bishop Rubin Phillip, is aimed at improving these relationships between the different race groups in the province.
It is irresponsible for anyone - whether from the black or Indian community - to use racial slurs. It then waters down all the work that we are trying to do in the province to try to bring about social cohesion and hegemony between the different races that live here. 
When foolish people think it is fashionable go on social media and call each other names, it is irresponsible. We need to start en- forcing the law. We need to start making examples, otherwise we won’t move forward.
The Mercury