Durban - Security has been tightened at train stations as authorities work on a safety plan so the suspension of train services across the province can be lifted.
Yesterday, thousands of commuters who usually use trains had to look for alternative transport 
MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison Mxolisi Kaunda is leading talks involving the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa), eThekwini Municipality, including mayor Zandile Gumede, the police, unions and other organisations.
Yesterday, he said he had escalated the matter to Transport Minister Blade Nzimande on Monday. 
Related ArticlesKZN train services suspended indefinitely“We are working together to intervene in challenges which gave rise to the incident of Friday. These include a security plan to guarantee the safety of people in order for operations to be reinstated.” 

Kaunda said police had already been deployed to hot spots but they would meet again on Friday to further unpack the plan. 
This comes after Prasa suspended train services following violence at an uMlazi station last Friday. 
Kaunda added that meetings would be held with uMlazi residents and commuters.
“We will be going to uMlazi to explain the plans and the conditions which need to be adhered to, to reinstate the train service. 

“We can’t tolerate anarchy and people who turn South Africa into a lawless society. But we respect the rights of communities to protest legally.”
The United Commuters’ Voices organisation distanced itself from acts of violence, saying responsible commuters would not damage infrastructure they needed to trans- port them. 
Provincial chairperson Zwabesho Shange said the suspension of services was frustrating as most commuters bought monthly tickets but now had to scrape together more money for alternative transport. 
“Trains are the cheapest mode of transport which take thousands of people to work every day. Our priority is to get the service reinstated,” he said. 

Prasa was not available for comment.
The Mercury