Durban - The National Consumer Commission (NCC) has launched a national clampdown on illicit goods and expired foods to investigate allegations that fake and expired foodstuffs and other goods are being sold to consumers.
NCC spokesperson Trevor Hattingh said they would be conducting compliance inspections along with various other authorities, including municipal police and health services in all nine provinces, in an effort to get to the bottom of the allegations and to prosecute the perpetrators.
This comes after violent protests and looting - over the alleged sale of illicit goods and expired food - left three people dead in Soweto last week
“We instituted an investigation into the allegations. Any evidence we get our hands on can be sampled in the context of the investigation, which will assist a prosecutorial process.”
Hattingh said there was “no reasonable basis” to believe the allegations that small, often foreign-owned businesses were selling fake, expired and harmful goods were true “because there is no formal complaint or evidence to support the allegations”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said the roll-out of the programme started in Pretoria on Friday as part of its strategy to deal with issues of expired goods, food and allegations of fake food. 
“We discovered that some retailers had goods that had passed their expiry date on the shelves, including Lovers Plus condoms, and Sunlight washing powder,” Hattingh said.
However, he added that the raids so far were not sufficient to provide a general view of what fake or expired goods were potentially being sold.
“We also want to appeal to consumers not to take the law into their own hands where a dispute has arisen between themselves and a supplier,” Hattingh said. 

He said perpetrators would be prosecuted, and expired food and goods would be removed and, where possible, destroyed. In addition, the NCC would be conducting compliance workshops with businesses.
“If it is found thereafter that a business is still not complying, then the NCC will lodge an application with the National Consumer Tribunal to declare the business’s conduct as prohibited conduct, and to recommend an administrative fine,” Hattingh said.
The Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry is also working on a local campaign to address the problem of counterfeit and expired goods, which it says has a negative impact on economic growth.
Chamber chief executive Palesa Phili said they had received numerous complaints about counterfeit goods being sold through informal traders in the CBD. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The informal sector is a key stakeholder in the local and national economy because of the access it provides to local communities. We have already started engaging with various stakeholders and are developing a programme to address this issue.”
SA National Consumers Union vice-chairperson Clif Johnston said it was an offence in terms of the Consumer Protection Act “to sell, or offer for sale, counterfeit goods, as this constitutes fraud.
“There are a lot of potentially substandard products that are not fake, in the sense that they do not imitate or copy a legitimate product,” he said. He said consumers had the right to recourse if they bought fake goods.
“Safety is the main concern, though this is often overstated. Even genuine branded foods, locally produced, have recently caused around 200 deaths. We are not aware of any such epidemics arising from fake food. 

“The local electrical industry rightly complains about non-complying and unsafe electrical appliances and accessories on the market, and they warn of dire consequences - shock, death, fire, explosions - that can arise from using products that do not comply with compulsory specifications,” he said.
The union’s acting chairperson, Marie van der Merwe, said although food past its “best before” or “sell by” dates may well be safe for human consumption, shops should not offer it for sale without drawing consumers’ attention to it so that they could make an informed decision. 
Consumers and communities can report any suspicious-looking food items or business selling expired food products to the NCC at 0124287000 or by e-mailing complaints@thencc.org.za
The Mercury