Durban - DA leader Mmusi Maimane yesterday announced the party’s third premier candidate in preparation for next year’s general elections. 
KwaZulu-Natal party leader Zwakele Mncwango joins City of Tshwane Mayor Solly Msimanga and Free State party leader Patricia Kopane on the list of those already made public by the party. Candidates for other provinces are yet to be announced. 
Maimane made the announcement at the JL Dube heritage site in the north of Durban as part of the launch of the party’s provincial election campaign. 
He paid tribute to Mncwango’s parents for using the little income they could collect to raise their son to become a prominent politician in the province.
“Here is a South African whose parents never had opportunities, yet, they wanted their kids to have dreams. 

“His father was a security guard, and his mother was a hawker at taxi ranks and on the streets in Nongoma,” said Maimane. 
He said Mncwango was an inspiration as he had overcome his childhood challenges and was one of the young leaders produced by the DA to take the country forward. 
“Zwakele, as a young South African, spent his days in the afternoon looking after cattle and goats after walking 10km to and from school.
“He is a South African who has overcome many challenges. Today, he has a national diploma in electrical engineering, a bachelor of technology in engineering management and a master’s in business administration.

Before announcing Mncwango as the KZN candidate, Maimane observed a moment of silence at the grave of ANC founding president John Langalibalele Dube. 
Maimane said he and Dube shared a dream of a non-racial South Africa. 
“Dr Dube, like me, we share a deep faith, the idea of building humanity in people. It is those ideas that I always draw inspiration from, and we will never depart from them,” he said.
Mncwango said when he takes over the province he will prioritise education and job creation.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We need to talk about issues of growing the economy in the province.
“We have harbours in Durban and Richards Bay. Therefore, we need to talk about how we use these ports to ensure that we grow our economy and create jobs,” said Mncwango. 
The Mercury