KZN ANC chairperson Sihle Zikalala wants strategic co-operation between municipalities and the ANC to quickly address the challenges facing municipalities.
Zikalala was speaking during an ANC breakfast meeting in Durban on Thursday.
He said it was important that municipalities worked closely with the office of the provincial secretary so that their challenges could be identified and attended to. 
"We want to know the issues in the council and what those deployed by the ANC are doing in the councils," he said. 
Zikalala said it was important that the Msunduzi Municipality addressed the issues of services raised by its stakeholders and the eThekwini Municipality to address the billing issues. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Some of the key strategic municipalities, such as Msunduzi, have faced challenges including negative audit opinions. Earlier this year, members of the co-operative governance and traditional affairs (Cogta) portfolio committee, during an oversight visit, left disgusted following an acrimonious meeting with the Msunduzi Municipality where they were allegedly treated with disdain and were not given answers to their questions. 
Zikalala’s call for close co-operation with the municipality comes a day after Cogta placed the uThukela District Municipality under administration. Cogta MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube said she was concerned about the financial stability of the municipality. 
Cogta has also placed the Mooi Mpofana municipality under administration. 
The DA's spokesperson on Cogta, Hlanganani Gumbi, said: “There is a concept of separation of powers. The municipalities cannot be running up and down accounting at the ANC office. That is why you often find the municipality serving the interests of the ANC and not those of service delivery.”

IFP MPL Blessed Gwala said such a “strategic co-operation” would be “making municipalities a branch of its provincial executive committee in order to milk (their) funds". 
“That will be the worst form of corruption. Municipalities must work in tandem with Cogta,” he said. 
THE MERCURY