Durban - Members of the KwaZulu-Natal Quality of Life Portfolio Committee are demanding answers after discovering that government money was spent on a project that does not exist.
The committee is responsible for overseeing projects that fall under the premier's office and those that touch on issues of youth, women and children in other departments.
The members recently went on an oversight visit to the Kumile Agricultural Project in Ilembe district only to find that the project did not exist.
The project was meant to be a co-operative to benefit local women planting yams. 
The report on the project tabled two years ago detailed items needed to make it a success and there had also been other reports about the project's progress. 

The project was funded by several government departments and municipalities. 
“As far as the portfolio committee members were aware the project was fully running”, said DA MPL Dr Imran Keeka.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He said written reports brought to the committee had detailed issues including inadequate fencing of the seven-hectare project; stock grazing on a small part of the land that is being used; and allegations of an under-age child working on the property.
“When we went for the site inspection, there was nothing on the site, but money has been spent we do not know how much,” said Keeka.

He said the area was unfenced and there were no co-operative members, let alone any who were trained.
“That government officials can compile a report about a project that does not exist is frightening,” he said. 
Vuyelwa Tambo, the committee's chairperson, said they would call a meeting with the various departments involved in the project to demand an explanation.
“The written report that had been given to us was totally different from the reality on the ground. That project does not exist. It's just a sugar cane farm. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We were told that the land owner had kicked out the women and planted sugar cane,” she said. 
“We want to know why they failed to update the portfolio committee on the fact that the project had collapsed and they need to give reasons for why it collapsed,” said Tambo.
The Mercury