Durban - The installation of surveillance cameras - apart from other security measures already implemented - is being considered for Burman Bush Nature Reserve in Morningside following a spate of crime and the murder of musician Simon Milliken last month.

 Head of Parks, Recreation and Culture, Thembinkosi Ngcobo said there is a call for surveillance cameras to be installed and funds have been identified.
 “There is a possibility of adding surveillance cameras so that we ensure even the corners that are not usually used by members of public can be seen,” said Ngcobo.
Ngcobo announced the immediate implementation of strict operational hours and the addition of more security during a meeting with concerned stakeholders earlier this month
 “Closing the gate at 6pm and opening the next morning at 6am is already on and we also have people who were brought in as part of the additional security so the place is now under guard,” he said.

 A further R500,000 has been allocated towards the replacement of the border fence around the reserve.
 “In terms of the fence we have identified the budget which comes to R5.5million and we are now going through the normal processes of procurement,” Ngcobo said.
 Ngcobo added that the department is holding a seminar at the ICC next week to discuss everything related to nature reserves in the city  
 “We will be outlining the way forward with regard to the management development of all the nature reserves in our city, especially those that have been experiencing problems with crime and other issues,” he said.

 Morningside ward councillor, Martin Meyer said: “People are now avoiding the area so we have a very sharp decrease in visitors to the  reserve and no new incidents have been reported to me during this time,” said Meyer.
 The launching committee for the Friends of Burman Bush is meeting Thursday said Meyer, to work towards “setting up the group and thus improve community involvement in improving Burman Bush.”
 Yesterday, in celebration of Heritage month the municipality’s Parks, Recreation and Culture Unit launched their annual PRC week with a cleanup of the Beachwood Mangroves Nature Reserve in Durban North.
The Mercury