DURBAN - THE relationship between the eThekwini Municipality and Tansnat Durban, the company that has been contracted to run the city’s bus service, continues to travel on a fractious path.
Their latest squabble has been over the city making deductions before paying Tansnat its monthly grant and lodging a High Court application to make its move binding.
Instead, Durban High Court Judge Piet Koen ruled in Tansnat’s favour and ordered the city to pay the grant in full for the duration of its contract with the bus company.
Judge Koen also confirmed that Tansnat, a company belonging to transport magnate Mandla Gcaba, would be liable for deductions once they were agreed upon by representatives from both parties and after the “intervention team” had scrutinised claims.
The intervention team (presently made up of representatives from accounting firm Grant Thornton) was appointed in January 2016 after both parties agreed.

KPMG held that duty previously.
It was tasked with probing various aspects of Tansnats’ two contracts with the municipality and to oversee its bank account.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The parties have locked horns over the issue of grant deductions before.
After a lengthy court battle they agreed in 2015 that the city would pay in full, without any prior deductions, the subsidy payable to Tansnat for services rendered into a ring-fenced bank account (a protection-based transfer of assets from one destination to another).

But in April 2017, Tansnat claimed it was in a crisis because it was owed R140 million by the city in respect of subsidy payments.
Tansnat’s legal representatives, Norton Rose Fulbright, filed an urgent High Court application and claimed the city had breached the agreement by making payments to itself through prior “non-transparent” deductions, against the subsidy amount.
It was also alleged that the former acting city manger had not released a R7.5m payment, which was verified by the intervention team.
The court ruled in Tansnat’s favour.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

A change of heart led to the city making its latest bid, earlier this year, to deduct expenses from Tansnat’s monthly grant.
In handing down his judgment, Judge Koen said: “The city is obliged to pay, without any prior set-off or withholding, its full subsidy into the ring-fenced bank account of Tansnat, which is administered by the intervention team.”
Municipal treasurer Krish Kumar said the city was committed to paying the full subsidy.
SUNDAY TRIBUNE