Durban - Members of the controversial Federation for Radical Economic Transformation (FFRET) stormed the headquarters of the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health’s Natalia Building in Pietermaritzburg on Thursday, where they demanded changes to the department’s procurement unit.
The Mercury understands that the group of about 20 FFRET members disrupted a meeting between management of the department and an intervention team which is at present running its procurement unit.
Police had to be called in to keep an eye on the situation because some officials feared for their lives. They demanded to make their views heard on how the department was awarding contracts. After being granted an audience, they made acting head of department Musa Gumede sign a letter reinstating an official to his position.
Mvusi Mahlaba, a director at supply chain management (SCM), had been moved to another unit within the department pending the finalisation of a tender investigation.
After storming the meeting, FFRET members had called for the intervention team - appointed by the government to run the department’s SCM unit - to be removed and that contracts be awarded to black-owned companies. Workers at the SCM department were told to vacate their offices. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

FFRET secretary Malusi Zondi, however, denied there were any threats made against officials. 
“Even the HOD was laughing, there was nothing like that,” he said.
However, sources close to the situation insisted that threats had been made against employees, resulting in some of them leaving work early.
Zondi said his organisation was concerned about the intervention team running the SCM unit. 

Last year the Provincial Treasury invoked Section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act and took over control of the supply chain management function in the department. 
One of the main tasks the team was faced with was to convert the month-to-month contracts into “proper” longer-term tenders and to put in place the necessary controls.
However, the team has been met with hostility. In May, some SCM staff members picketed outside the offices complaining of, among other things, being ill-treated by members of the intervention team.
“The team is getting paid millions a year, but since they have started not even one tender has been awarded. They have just been renewing old contracts and that is clearly a waste of taxpayers’ money,” Zondi said .AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Department of Health spokesperson Ncumisa Mafunda said the provincial intervention team at SCM was brought into the department after a resolution of the executive council, “having taken into consideration the serious challenges faced by SCM of the department”.
Earlier yesterday, KZN ANC chairperson Sihle Zikalala said the business forums which disrupted business did not represent what the ANC stood for. 
“We need an operation from the government to deal with disruptions. Police must act and act decisively,” he said.
The Mercury