Durban - Durban continues to rack up awards, this time the city walked away with an international award from the World Wide Fund’s (WWF) 2018 One Planet City Challenge which was announced last week in San Francisco, California.

 eThekwini Municipality was named as a national winner in the African category and competed with 132 cities from 23 countries around the world.
Durban emerged as the strongest competitor from South Africa with its well-rounded approach regarding energy consumption targets and actions.
 Receiving the award, Mayor Zandile Gumede said, “We are excited about winning this prestigious award, clearly, whatever we have been doing as the city is working and it is getting international recognition.”
 “eThekwini Municipality has been a leader in climate action and continues to combine ambitious targets and focused action with community development initiatives,” continued Gumede.

 Durban has made strong progress in improving sustainable mobility by building a spacious cycling network. The jury acknowledged eThekwini’s efforts towards sustainability to be particularly impressive, given the small size yet high population of the city.
 Mayor Gumede, also Vice President for c40 Cities, was speaking on the sides of the Global Climate Action Summit held in San Francisco where she joined international community leaders engaging on issues of climate change.
 Durban recently won a green award from national department of environmental affairs and urban greening from national department of agriculture.
 The Swedish City of Uppsala was named global winner of WWF’s 2018 One Planet City Challenge.

 Jakarta and Indonesia was given a special mention for its work in the We Love Cities campaign, which supports participants of the One Planet City Challenge, through citizen engagement.

National winners of WWFs City Challenge 2018:
Brazil – Belo Horizonte

Canada – Vancouver
Chile – Santiago
Colombia - Monteria
Ecuador - Quito

Guatemala – Pachalum
India –Rajkot
Indonesia – Jakarta
Japan -Yokohama

Malaysia - Melaka
Mexico - Guadalajar
Pakistan –Karachi
Peru - Magdalena Del Mar

Philippines -Pasig
South Africa – eThekwini (Durban)  
Sweden - Uppsala
Tanzania - Dar Es Salaam

Thailand -Yasothon
Turkey –Izmir
Uganda - Kampala
United States – Cleveland

Vietnam - Da Nang
The Mercury