DURBAN - It’s been a long road for 20-year-old Matthew Legemaate who has successfully recovered from a heart and double lung transplant - and now he’s planning to take his journey further as he takes on the Tsogo Sun Amashova Classic in October.
Born with a heart defect, Legemaate’s first open heart surgery took place when he was just 36 hours old and on-going surgeries during his childhood only complicated the massive operation transplanting his heart and lungs last November.
As he was wheeled into surgery, he was given only a slight chance of survival. At that time, he was only the second patient worldwide in 2017 to undergo such a difficult operation which took eleven hours. For four years prior to his surgery, Matthew was permanently on oxygen, tiring easily.
“There are no words to explain the feelings I had when I woke up after the transplant, It was like being born again and being able to breathe gallons of air,” said Legemaate.
Directly after his operation, he battled to walk due to slight nerve damage and started working with a physiotherapist and biokineticist.

“In January my biokineticist, Justin said why don’t we do the Amashova. I thought he was joking and so said yes. Six weeks later, I realised he wasn’t joking,” said Legemaate this week.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He trains every day in the gym and cycles every second day in preparation for the 35km family event which is part of the annual Amashova race, which starts in Pietermaritzburg and finishes on Durban’s Golden Mile.
“We’ve been doing 15km, next week we’ll be working up to 20km and then 30km. This week, we’ve been on a mountain biking trail and I enjoyed that as well,” he said.
Now writing his matric online, Legemaate has already passed two exams. When he’s not studying, he’s working on the Hero777 project, which he started while waiting for a transplant, to raise awareness on the importance of organ donation.

He will be riding with more than 100 others who will take part in the Amashova to raise awareness in Hero777s “race to save lives”.
“I now get to do all the things I couldn’t do before my operation.
“Since I started our campaign, 25000 people have registered to become donors. But I still want to achieve my initial goal of 50000 and then keep going. One organ donor can save up to seven lives and assist up to 50 others,” he said, adding that only 0.1% of the population were registered as donors at the time of his transplant, with a waiting list of 4300 patients.
He is also campaigning to bring the “heart-in-a-box” technology which extends the life of a heart while in transit to South Africa.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Legemaate’s mother, Janet, who has worked tirelessly to raise awareness over the importance of organ donation, said, “It was an incredibly difficult operation. He’ll always be susceptible and will have to permanently take medication, but it’s been such a huge change in our lives since the operation.
“It’s been surreal and fantastic to have been given this opportunity. I often think of the donor family and the difficult decision they made. I’ll be eternally grateful for that decision.”
Looking ahead, Legemaate said he’s working on his photography which he fell in love with while still on oxygen and which he sees as his future career.
Amashova race director Annie Batchelder said, “Matthew has shown great courage against all the odds and we are delighted that he is participating in this year’s race. Like Matthew, we have so many inspiring individuals that compete in our race and encompass the ‘Spirit of Shova’.”

A fundraising event “Bravissimo” is being held at Hangar 8 at the Virginia Airport from on October 13 from 4pm until late, to raise awareness for organ and tissue donation. All proceeds will go to the Hero777 campaign.
Tickets cost R350 per person and are available through Quicket http://qkt.io/DVwm76
 INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY