DURBAN - THE discovery of a body believed to be that of the missing pupil Miguel Louw has left the Phoenix community shocked, a local leader said, as he called for the killer to be locked up for life.
A body believed to be Miguel’s was found in a shallow grave on Longbury Drive in Phoenix when private security guards were chasing armed robbers on Monday afternoon. It is strongly believed the body was that of Miguel’s, despite no official confirmation from the police.
Provincial police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said a post-mortem would be conducted on Wednesday and said police would be using DNA analysis to confirm the identity of the deceased.
A murder docket was opened on Monday after the discovery of the body. 
However, on Monday, police confirmed that the body was found just a few metres away from the home of the kidnap accused Mohammed Vahed Ebrahim, who was granted R2500 bail by the Durban Magistrates Court last week. He is believed to be still in prison as the bail has not been paid. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Ebrahim, who is awaiting trial for kidnapping and theft, has not been charged with murder. 
Patrick Pillay, the leader of the Democratic Liberal Congress (DLC) said September 3rd would remain one of the saddest days for the Phoenix community.

“As the leader of the DLC, I was shocked to learn that the child's body was found in a shallow grave near my house. The community has come out in full support for the family,” he said.
“The anger of the community could be felt in the air that an innocent child’s life was taken away by a sadistic, merciless criminal. As a parent I feel great sadness for the mother. The family had to endure weeks of uncertainty,” added Pillay.
Pillay said the killer should be locked up for life.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“This callous murderer must be thrown in jail and the keys thrown away. This murderer does not deserve any mercy and should face the full might of the law. The death penalty will be the only deterrent to stop these callous murders,” he added.

  
  
   Police officers have cordoned off an area in Phoenix where the body of a young boy, believed to be Miguel Louw was found on Monday. Picture: POST
  
 
DAILY NEWS