DURBAN - Newly appointed National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) administrator Dr Randall Carolissen has promised a smoother application process for students in a bid to address payment delays in the academic year in 2019.

Carolissen said once students had applied for funding, they would get notice from them within seven days. 
“Should a student not receive the acknowledgement, they are requested to call NSFAS’s toll free call centre, which is 08000 67327.”
Carolissen, who has been in office barely 10 days, said his priority was to clear the funding backlog. Last week NSFAS announced that it had successfully processed an outstanding payment of R1.2 billion to students and higher learning institutions. Carolissen said some of this amount was for students whose allowances were delayed earlier this year. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
With the scheme's new online application, which opened on Monday, Carolissen was confident that each applicant would be considered with "great care" and enormous attention will be given to evaluating every application. 

“Each application will be treated equally by the NSFAS funding committee. Complete and submit your materials as soon as possible to ensure full and timely consideration of your application. There are tips and guidelines online and on our YouTube channel for step-by-step information," he said.

 
 
  National Student Financial Aid Scheme Administrator Dr Randall Carolissen
 

He said students could also track and trace the progress of their applications online by simply logging in their cellphone or ID numbers. 
The scheme is expected to receive more than 273 000 applications for TVET College students and about 211 000 from the universities for the 2019 academic year.

“We have also sent remittances to every institution to ensure money is allocated to students accordingly without delays. I am happy that this has been welcomed by vice-chancellors, college principals and SRC positive progress towards assisting the students,” Carolissen said. 
How to apply for NSFAS
Make sure that you have certified and valid copies of the following documents:
- Your South African identity document/card (or an unabridged birth certificate (if you are younger than 16 years old)AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

- ID of parents and/or guardian (or death certificate where applicable)
- Pay advice/letter of employment/pension advice stating income (not older than 3 months) (SASSA slips are not required and SASSA should not be included as household income)
- Download the consent form and fill it in with your parent/gaurdian's signatures. Applications without a signed consent form by all people whose incomes have been declared in the application will not be accepted, and will be considered as incomplete.
- If you have a disability, download the Disability Annexure A and fill it in

SUNDAY TRIBUNE