Durban - Residents have called for a pedestrian bridge to be built across the highway which separates Phoenix and Cornubia. 

Lyndal Singh, Phoenix ward 50 councillor said there is an influx of residents crossing over the R102 to access facilities in her ward which borders Cornubia. 
“So kids and residents that cross over are coming from ward 102 into ward 50 because there are no schools in Cornubia,” said Singh.
K.M Subrayen, principal of Grove End Secondary School said more than 50 percent of his pupils are from Cornubia and every morning they walk across the highway. 
“There is no high school for them in Cornubia, we are the designated high school because my school is the closest to Cornubia,” said Subrayen.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Although no one has been hurt from Grove End, Subrayen said about four children from other schools in the area have lost their lives.
Subrayen said he worries about his pupils crossing the road everyday and “it’s only a matter of time before more people get hurt if they don't put a bridge there.” 
In a desperate plea for a pedestrian bridge, I Heart South Africa posted pictures of children waiting to cross the road on Facebook as cars and trucks drive by.
Many of the comments echoed the call for a bridge to be built while a few said that it would not be used.

Sashveer Arjoon said:  “Yes please build a bridge so many adults and kids lose [their] lives and I really don't want to be the one to knock anyone on this road.”
Vishaal Singh suggested that a bridge could not be built then a school should be built in Cornubia.
The eThekwini Municipality said the municipality Humans Settlements Unit’s Training and Outreach section will be tasked with co-ordinating a road safety awareness campaign for scholars in the area.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“The municipality is currently exploring various options for improving road safety on the R102, including the possibility of erecting electronic signage and a pedestrian bridge,”said the municipality.

In addition to this, the EThekwini Transport Authority is exploring possible ways to roll out safety awareness programmes to the dynamics of Cornubia as part of their improved road safety campaign.
The Mercury