DURBAN - While some stadiums that were built for the 2010 World Cup were said to be struggling to generate revenue, Durban’s Moses Mabhida Stadium has shown significant improvements over the years. The iconic stadium was voted the most popular stadium in South Africa in an online poll and it has hosted more cup finals than any other stadium that was used during the World Cup.
According to recent financial statements, Moses Mabhida has an annual turnover of R80 million. Stadium general manager Vusi Mazibuko attributed the success to aspects he believed gave Moses Mabhida a competitive advantage against other stadiums.

“It is multi-dimensional, it does not rely on the soccer games. There are attractions, people’s parks and it is fully commercialised so there is continuous income,” Mazibuko said.
“For example, we have the sky car, bungee jumping and hospitality services which are insourced. This means we don’t spend much on outsourced services,” he explained.

Mazibuko said the location of the stadium also made the stadium a preferred venue for many of their clients.
“People love to be in Durban - it is along the beach, with hotels and a casino,” he added.

Although the stadium is not being used as a home ground by any Durban teams playing in the Premier Soccer League, it has managed to attract Kaizer Chiefs to host at least four of their home games at the stadium.
Mazibuko added that the restaurants and lifestyle outlets inside the premises made it easier to attract clients.

“Soccer is our primary function, but lifestyle, hospitality, cultural and religious events have contributed immensely.
“When you bring games to Moses Mabhida, it’s not only for Durban or KZN people. Other provinces, particularly Gauteng, find it easy to get here.

“We have hotels around the stadium. It’s easy to access even when there is no game. We use mostly insourced services which makes it easier to sell ourselves to more clients,” said Mazibuko.
There are various events planned for December, including the #FillUpMosesMabhida organised by local ­rapper Cassper Nyovest.