Durban - Unidentified assailants have kidnapped three people, including a South African, working at a gold mine run by Ghana-based Balaji in northeastern Burkina Faso near the border with Mali. 
The other two workers are Burkinabe and Indian.
The three had set off for the capital Ouagadougou from the remote Inata mine, about 200km away, on Sunday morning, before losing contact with colleagues, said a security officer at the mine who asked not to be named. 
An official at Balaji Group told Reuters: “It is true that three people were kidnapped. 
“The authorities are working on it but we don’t have the details of that yet.” 

The security officer said attempts to contact the workers had been in vain. He was unable to provide further details. 
It was not clear who was responsible for the disappearance. 
Jihadist groups have become increasingly active in northern Burkina Faso in recent years, mirroring a wider proliferation in the arid Sahel region of jihadist groups with links to al Qaeda and Islamic State. 
South Africa’s International Relations and Co-operation Ministry confirmed in a statement that a South African national had been kidnapped.

The ministry said the government was working with law enforcement on the matter.
It said the family of the affected South African had been informed.
“Government urges all South Africans to be alert when they travel and to be sensitive to possible security challenges in areas they are visiting or working.
“South Africans also are reminded to register with the mission or with the Department of International Relations and Co-operation when working or travelling abroad,” said Dirco spokesperson Ndivhuwo Mabaya. 

The Indian Consulate in Burkina Faso did not respond to a request for comment. 
Senior research consultant for the Institute of Security Studies (ISS), Liesl Louw-Vaudran said Burkina Faso was known for terrorism activities, which started in early 2013.
She said that radical Islamic jihadist groups had become increasingly active in northern Burkina Faso in recent years. 
“It is a very insecure area as there are thousands of international troops on missions there. 

“What makes it more complicated is that these areas are remote from the capital city. The ISS has a team there on the ground doing security studies,” Louw-Vaudran said.
The Mercury