DURBAN - TRAVELLING 3000km by foot, amputees, Paul Steyn and Mike Minnie have embarked on an epic walk from Pretoria to Cape Town via Nelspruit, Durban, East London and Port Elizabeth.
Over five months, the pair began their adventure on June 26 with the objective of raising funds to assist disadvantaged amputees with prosthetic limbs.
And during their stopover in Durban this week, their efforts were translated into making a difference in a young Durban woman’s life.
At the Musgrave Park Medical Centre on Wednesday, 35-year-old amputee, Nombuso Shandu from Umlazi received a limb through the Paul Steyn Foundation. In 2014, she suffered from a vascular problem in both her legs, with a wound in her left leg which led to it being amputated in 2015.
“When I was amputated, I lost a lot of confidence. I just wanted to hide. Then I teamed up with people with disabilities and they helped me realise that I need do something with my life. So I did a general management course and I’m currently doing a learnership at a call centre,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Steyn had his leg amputated after an accident at school when his leg was caught in the blades of a lawn mower pulled behind a tractor.
Steyn says the walk he and Minnie have embarked on is very challenging but it aims to raise awareness about the plight of amputees.
“I’m using 40% more energy than a person with both legs with every step that I walk. Above leg amputees like Mike Minnie are using 100% more energy with every step. There’s a different mindset. It’s a mental challenge to walk every day and to put yourself in the space to do motivational talks and so on. But our biggest challenge still remains to raise funds and buy prosthetic legs for people in South Africa.”
Along the way, the guys have set up motivational talks at schools, churches and community organisations.

Also during a visit this week to the Lungisisa Indlela Village (LIV) which helps with the crisis of orphaned and vulnerable children in the country, Steyn said he was in the same situation as the centre’s children.
“I was 13 years old when I lost my leg. And I was in an orphanage shortly after that. My whole life felt like it was going down when that happened.
“I also suffered with dyslexia. But I studied and I’m a cinematographer, so anything is possible,” Steyn said.
Through the walk, The Paul Steyn Foundation has assisted six amputees with prosthetic legs.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We’ve helped an eleven-year-old in Mbombela with prosthetic legs. And people in Nelspruit and in KwaZulu Natal. It costs roughly between R60000 to R100000 per limb,” he said.
With regards to the walk which ends in Cape Town, Steyn plans to complete the rest of the journey on crutches as he’s due for an operation while in Durban.
THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY