Durban - Strange coins, buttons, bus and tram tickets and a gold ring are just some of the items that have appeared in the collection plates at the Musgrave Methodist Church in Musgrave Road.
This year the church celebrates the 125th anniversary of the existing church building, on a corner stand where St Thomas and Musgrave roads meet. It plays a prominent role in the lives of many who live on the Berea and is the centre of an outreach programme, including a clinic, to those in need in the area.
The first Musgrave Road Methodist Church opened on Easter Sunday in 1877 but this building was demolished to make way for the existing church.
Many will remember the famous Greenacres department store in Durban, which closed in May 1982. The church land was donated by the Greenacre family, whose family home, The Caister, stands nearby. Their home later became a popular hotel and is now a retirement community.
Originally the church land adjoined the Greenacre estate and was little more than sand-hill and bush. The 1877 church proved too small for a rapidly growing congregation and a new church was needed.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In April 1893 the foundation stone for the new building was laid, and so began the life of one of the Berea’s architectural gems. The building cost £3200 (R62000).
As with many Berea buildings, the beautiful high-vaulted timber ceiling is in constant need of care against borer. But the cost is worth it to preserve the fine craftsmanship on display.
The church was the spiritual home of several prominent Durban families, including retail store rivals Harold Payne and Walter Greenacre. They owned rival retail clothing stores in the city centre. They also alternated as treasurers of the church trust.
Earlier histories of the church described their relationship in these words: “Rivals in business they were equally determined to show their competence in managing Church affairs. So, if there was ever a shortfall, or the collection looked a bit thin, the one in charge at the time would make up the total to a respectable sum.

“This doubtless ensured a steady income, but led to members of the congregation feeling no responsibility for the maintenance and running of the church. No wonder strange objects were collected in the collection bags, such as foreign coins, buttons and books of tram tickets, used tickets and even a lady’s gold ring.”
A manse was built in 1895 and a hall, for Sunday school, was added in 1899. In 1929 a new organ was installed, one of the finest of its kind in Durban. Over the years the trustees have made sure the organ remains in working order and when the congregation celebrates the 125th anniversary on September 30, the organ will tower over worshippers.
The earlier generation will be looking down benignly on the celebrations from their sun-lit vantage point.
 Independent On SaturdayAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads