Former Durban businessman and convicted fraudster Kessie Nair said he called President Cyril Ramaphosa the K-word as a “tactic” to draw attention to himself, and insists he is sane. 
Nair, who has been charged with crimen injuria and incitement over the racist Facebook rant, appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court yesterday.
He was meant to apply for bail, but the State said they wanted to deal with his mental assessment.
State prosecutor San Bhartu handed in affidavits from Nair’s ex-wife, brothers and district surgeon Dr Shikar Bhagwandeen, who all claimed Nair displayed signs of mental instability. 
Apart from calling Ramaphosa the K-word, Nair blamed the president for the current state of the country.

He was nabbed by the Hawks a day after the video surfaced. 
During a break in the court proceedings, Nair told journalists he wanted to apologise to Ramaphosa and the nation, but insisted that he was sane. 
Nair said: “The remarks that I made on video which I posted... there would have been different alternatives that I could’ve used. 
“I call upon the president and nation as a whole to find it within them to forgive me,” he said.

Nair also made an apology prior to his arrest.
Bhartu said the district surgeon had recommended that Nair be sent to Fort Napier Hospital for assessment. 
In his affidavit, read out in court, Bhagwandeen said that there were no signs of mental illness, but Nair possessed “elements of grandiosity and delusion” and felt deep remorse.
Nair’s former wife, Vasanthi Nair, said they had divorced in 1988 and then reunited. 

She said Nair was incarcerated between 1989 and 1990 after he was found guilty of fraud. 
“I started realising that his mental state started degrading while he was in prison. 
“He would always mumble about numbers and would become aggressive if I didn’t bring what he asked for,” she said. 
Vasanthi added that during his second incarceration, between 2005 and 2009, after he pleaded guilty to fraud involving R17500, she saw “different personalities” displayed by him, and he was often in the prison hospital. 

She added that Nair was also physically ill. “He had a massive heart attack and is on the transplant list. 
“Doctors said although he is on medication, there is no option other than the transplant. 
“He has been secluded ever since and spent most times depressed. He had a personality change,” Vasanthi added. 
She said Nair was “not a racist” and should be admitted to an institution”. 

Nair’s lawyer, Chris Gounden, said his client was not mentally unstable and requested to cross-examine the witnesses who provided affidavits. 
The case was postponed to next month for further investigation.
The Mercury