Durban - The eThekwini Municipality's head of legal services, Gideon Phungula, has been suspended.
The city confirmed he was suspended on Tuesday to allow for the completion of an investigation into allegations that he allegedly used the derogatory word c**lies to refer to Indian officials at the municipality.
Phungula is also facing a second probe into claims that he had made misrepresentations when applying for his post as head of legal services.
However, he has dismissed the allegations against him. 
eThekwini Municipality spokesperson Mandla Nsele confirmed the investigation.

“Allegations relating to the irregular appointment of Mr Phungula were received and an investigation has been initiated,” he said.
Nsele also confirmed that Phungula had been suspended.
It is alleged the racist slur is contained in a recorded telephone conversation in which a man believed to be Phungula is also heard bragging that his political links had landed him a top job at the municipality.
Phungula’s appointment in June prompted one of the unsuccessful candidates to lodge a grievance.

Sbu Shezi, the former acting head of legal services, confirmed yesterday that he had lodged a grievance because he wanted the city to investigate certain aspects of Phungula’s appointment.
“Two things struck me. One is that the municipal manager was not part of the interview panel. 
"The second is that we were informed of the outcome of the interview on May 30 and the following day Phungula reported for his first day at work,” he said.
Phungula had also been among the candidates interviewed for the same position in October 2017. 

Out of the five candidates interviewed in 2017, Phungula was scored fourth.
This information is contained in documents from the city that have been seen by The Mercury.
At the time Phungula’s current deputy, Malusi Mhlongo, had received the highest score in the interview but the city had decided not to make the appointment.
This prompted Mhlongo to embark on a protracted process to try to get the information regarding the interview process.

The city only agreed to release the information after Mhlongo approached the South African Local Government Bargaining Council, which found in his favour.
The city told the bargaining council that the appointment had not been made as it needed to “consider the employment equity strategy” - which included the employment of women.
The city eventually offered Mhlongo a monetary settlement.
Phungula told the Mercury that if there was justice he would be back at work in no time.

“I am far more qualified than the position requires. For example, I have worked as a lawyer for more than 15 years but the post required 7 years' experience. 
"It also required a BProc and I have a BProc, an LLB Honours and a Master's in Business Leadership which I obtained summa cum laude. I am admitted in the high court as an attorney and a notary public,” Phungula said.
While saying he did not know of any investigation into his appointment he dismissed claims that it was irregular.
He claimed it may have been brought by people who were bitter for not making the cut.

“You know it is always expected that when you get into a position some people will be bitter,” he said.
Phungula said he would not challenge the suspension, which relates only to the recording in which he allegedly made a racist remark.
“When you challenge such things it looks like you are hiding something.”
Asked to confirm that it was him on the recording, Phungula retorted: “It is a fabrication. You know technology has evolved so much you might listen to a song and think it is by a particular person, only to find that it was by some voice-over artist.”

The Mercury