Cape Town - It's going to be another chilly few days for parts of the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and Northern Cape, with the intense cold front bringing with it scatterings of snow.
 
 
  According to the South African Weather Service website: "
  An intense cut off low is expected to affect parts of the Western Cape, 
  Northern Cape and Eastern Cape over the next few days. The public and small stock farmers are advised that very cold conditions and snowfalls on the high ground are expected."
 
 
  
 
 
  They've also advised of disruptive snowfall which is expected over the Sneeuberg mountains of the Eastern Cape overnight.
 
 
  
 
 
  Snow has also been spotted in parts of the Boland in the Western Cape.
 
 
  
     Earlier today, Snow Report SA earlier reported that the cold front made landfall in the Western Cape yesterday. "We suspect that there is already light snow across most of the high peaks in the Cedarberg and the HexRiver Mountains this morning. Going forward for today, we are expecting light snowfalls to continue over the high peaks of the Cedarberg and Hex River Mountains, with some slightly heavier falls possible further south on the mountains around Wellington," one report read.
  
   
  More light snowfall is expected over these regions over the next few days through the weekend. 
 
 
  "By Thursday afternoon, we are expecting to see snowfalls return to the Cedarberg and Hex River Mountains, with light snow possible over all the high peaks and ranges between Wellington and Oudtshoorn. 
 
 
  
 
 
  "We also expect light snowfalls to start in the Northern Cape during Thursday. The area between Beaufort West in the Western Cape and Cradock in the Eastern Cape could also see snowfalls at this time, with some heavier falls on the extreme high ground," said Snow Report SA. 
 AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 
  
  As the cold front moves east on Friday morning, snow is expected to impact regions further into the Eastern Cape from Graaff-Reinet through to Somerset East, and then to Hogsback.
 
 
  
 
 
  The snow is also expected to extend further east into the Eastern Cape Drakensberg regions and Lesotho. 
  
  
 
 
  Residents are expected to keep warm, and to be safe while traveling in inclement conditions.
  
  
 

 

 * Do you have pictures of the snow? Tweet or email us your photographs and videos.*

 

 @capetimes

 

 ctnews@inl.co.za

 

 Cape Times