Johannesburg - The Gauteng Department of Education has expressed concern after a video surfaced of a pupil performing what appears to be a lap dance on another learner inside a classroom. Scores of learners can be seen loudly egging the teenager on as she performs the lewd dance routine on a male pupil.

 

 According to the department, the video was taken in February. 

 

 The department said that the girl is allegedly nine months pregnant and is currently preparing to give birth. Her parents have already been summoned to the school and she is expected to face disciplinary proceedings on her return.

 

 “We are highly disappointed by the conduct of these learners, which has brought the school in disrepute. The school is one of our best performing schools that produces 100% pass (rates), especially
  in Mathematics and Science. Schools are institutions of teaching and learning
  and should be treated as such. We strongly condemn any acts of misconduct, which seeks to undermine the dignity of our learning institutions," said Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi.   

 

 Lesufi further called on parents to assist the school with discipline issues, both at school as well as outside school hours, reiterating that this was a societal issue.

 

 While IOL has seen the video clip, we will not be publishing the video or naming the school involved. 

 

 Another learner at the same school recently appeared before a disciplinary and was suspended for five days for a video clip in which the teenager purportedly "used
  foul language and promoted engagement in sexual activities". 

 

 "We are aware that there are about three videos that were captured by Grade 10 learners in February 2018, and as such the investigation will involve the entire learner population from the said grade. The outcome of the investigation will determine the disciplinary action against all implicated learners.

 

 "Our Psychosocial Team has been dispatched to the school to offer support and counselling to all affected by this incident," the department said.

 

 The department said it was interacting with former learners to create a mentorship programme in the hope of helping to promote "good learner conduct".

 

 IOL