Durban - Armed robbers held up a building contractor and a domestic worker at a home in Reservoir Hills on Thursday morning.

Blue Security community and media liaison officer Andreas Mathios said the robbers targeted the home where a builder was working on site at around 10.15am.
“The builder had gone outside the property to collect some building materials and left the gate open. Four suspects, two of them armed with firearms, arrived in a white C180 Mercedes-Benz with no registration plates,” Mathios said.
“The gang held up the builder and domestic worker and locked them in the domestic worker’s room on the property. They then forced open the front door and security gate to gain entry into the home. They ransacked the house and fled with a flatscreen television and jewellery and possibly other items too. No injuries were reported,” Mathios said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Sydenham SAPS attended the scene of the crime.

Mathios advised residents to be security conscious when engaging contractors to work on their homes. “Unfortunately, criminals are surveying neighbourhoods in search of opportunities and vulnerable moments. It’s therefore vital that residents provide instructions to contractors regarding security precautions to take while on site,” Mathios said.
He also advised residents to provide domestic workers with a spare remote panic button.
In a separate incident early on Thursday morning, an armed response officer and a police officer arrested two suspects in Springfield Park.
Mathios said the armed response officer was responding to a panic alarm at a business premises in Intersite Avenue at around 9.50am. The Sydenham SAPS also arrived.

“The store manager advised him that eight suspicious men had been seen loitering on the premises. The men had arrived in three different vehicles, a blue Audi A4, a black Golf 5 and a Grey Toytota Avanza,” Mathios said.
Mathios said the number plates on two of the vehicles were found to be false following a police check, while the third vehicle did not have any number plates displayed.
“Some of the suspects managed to flee in the Toyota Avanza but the police swooped on the driver of the Golf and arrested him while our officer swiftly arrested the driver of the Audi,” Mathios said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Sydenham SAPS took the suspects into custody.

 The Independent on Saturday