Durban - Widow, Rihaana Shaik, was delighted when she received a fully furnished house in Ladysmith.
Shaik was one of two beneficiaries of houses in a project being carried out by the Office of the Premier, which had partnered with the Department of Human Settlements, the Al Imdaad Foundation and Ayona Construction. The handover took place at the weekend. 
The need for government intervention was identified by MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs Sihle Zikalala and MEC for Human Settlements Ravi Pillay during their deployment for the government’s Operation Sukuma Sakhe Cabinet Day in 2016.
Shaik relies on a social grant to provide for herself.
An emotional Shaik said: “I still cannot get over the fact that I have my own home. I am sad and happy at the same time. I am sad that my husband is not here to share this joy with me, and my family is not here.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She said that since her husband died a few years ago, she and her grandson had never had a stable place to live. Her grandson is currently staying in Pietermaritzburg with some relatives.
“Since my husband died, my life changed, we were always getting notices to move,” she said. 
Shaik had previously been living in a self-built structure which was in poor condition, when she was identified for the Operation Sukuma Sakhe project.
Another beneficiary of a house is Lindiwe Ntuli, whose husband Ben had been a well-known political activist who worked closely with the late Alfred Duma in the liberation Struggle.

Ntuli, of Colenso, said that before her husband’s death in 2000, he had been mocked for living in poverty despite the fact that he had been at the forefront of the Struggle.
Ntuli said she was pleased that her family would have a comfortable place to live. 
She lives in a small four-room dilapidated property. No one at her home is employed and there are about 13 people sharing the house. 
“We had been waiting for this for quite some time. We are happy it is finally happening,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“My husband would also be pleased,” she added.
The Mercury