Durban - Former president Thabo Mbeki has weighed in on the debate on land expropriation without compensation, saying the ANC’s position suggests the party has changed its character and marks a departure from its mission of creating a non-racial society.
The leaked 30-page document from the Thabo Mbeki Foundation, states that some utterances made by ANC leaders, after the December 2017 conference, suggest that “land would be expropriated from one national group without compensation and handed to another national group”.
The document, believed to be written by Mbeki, says the debate represents a radical departure from the policies advanced by the ANC since its formation.
Independent Media yesterday established the authenticity of the document.
“Certainly, the argument that has been advanced by the ANC leadership since the 54th National Conference about the Land Question communicates the firm statement that the ANC has changed in terms of its character, it is no longer a representative of the people of South Africa,” reads a paragraph in the document.

It cites statements by former president Jacob Zuma, one in which he called for the “historically disadvantaged” people to unite in Parliament so as to “correct the wrongs of this country” as further proof of a change in character.
Such an utterance, the document read, meant Zuma was redefining the ANC by characterising it as a “black party”.
It is further argued that the ANC’s resolution on land, adopted at the Nasrec conference, talks about redistribution on racial terms, as it had chosen to divide the South African population into two groups - namely that of white descendants of colonists and emigrant Europeans, and that of the original African population which occupied particular territories before 1652.
It also questions why the ANC leadership has failed to respond to what the writer of the document calls a “legitimate question” once posed by Cope leader Mosiuoa Lekota, who had questioned the ANC’s resolution which calls for the expropriation of land for the purposes of transferring it to “our people”.

In this context, Lekota had wanted to know who were not “our people”. 
In the document, Mbeki traces the ANC’s history in relation to land and the national question. 
He says the ANC must understand that in the context of the debate on land expropriation without compensation, it has an obligation to uphold the two principles espoused in the Freedom Charter that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and that land shall be shared among those who work it.
The document stated that in its 105-year history before the December conference where it adopted the resolution, the ANC’s position on land had always been in line with the Freedom Charter.

This, Mbeki says, is the position that the ANC has always defended and had led to the formation of the breakaway PAC, which disagreed with the assertion that the country belongs to all who live in it.
He says the ANC’s resolution on land can be literally understood to mean that it sought to address a historical injustice by expropriating one group for the benefit of another national group.
The views contained in the document have been met with criticism by the likes of the EFF, whose national spokesperson, Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, said it showed the former president was not sincere when he made his famous “I am an African” speech.
Addressing students at the University of KwaZulu-Natal yesterday, Ndlozi said Mbeki had jumped into defending white land domination as “he realises that we (black people) are united on the question of land in this country for the first time”.

Black First Land First president Andile Mngxitama said the ANC had been formed as a black party and that Zuma wanted to return it to its roots. 
“There is no place for blacknesss in the ANC,” he said.
The Thabo Mbeki Foundation did not respond to questions at the time of going to press.
ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe could not be reached for comment yesterday.

The Mercury