It's no secret that Priyanka Chopra and Duchess Meghan have been friends for years, so it comes as no surprise that they have things in common. 
 

 Priyanka, who recently announced her engagement to singer Nick Jonas, also attended her close friend's royal wedding in May, when Meghan married Britain's Prince Harry.

 

 Meghan and Harry announced their engagement in November and shared their official engagement photographs captured by Alexi Lubomirski soon after. 

 



   
    
     
      
      
       
      
     
    
    
    
     
      
       
        

        
       
      
     
    
     
     
       View this post on Instagram
     
    
     
    
      
       
       
      
     
      
       
      
     
      
       
       
      
     
     
    Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle have chosen to release this official portrait photograph to mark their engagement. The photograph was taken by photographer @alexilubomirski earlier this week at Frogmore House, Windsor.

A post shared by  Kensington Palace (@kensingtonroyal) on Dec 21, 2017 at 3:59am PST

  
 


 

 The same photographer was commissioned to cover Ralph Lauren 50th Anniversary fashion show as part of New York Fashion Week on Friday, an event attended by many celebrity A-listers, among them Priyanka and Nick.

 

 Lubomirski snatched up the opportunity to capture the newly-engaged couple at the event, in a pose that has been likened to Harry and Meghan's engagement snap. 

 

 Taking to Instagram, Lubomirski shared the picture of the couple with the caption: "@priyankachopra at @ralphlauren 50th anniversary show last night in #NYFW........ What an amazing honour to get to photograph all these amazing people in one night! Thank you Ralph and all the team!!!"

 



   
    
     
      
      
       
      
     
    
    
    
     
      
       
        

        
       
      
     
    
     
     
       View this post on Instagram
     
    
     
    
      
       
       
      
     
      
       
      
     
      
       
       
      
     
     
    @nickjonas and @priyankachopra at @ralphlauren 50th anniversary show last night in #NYFW. What an amazing honour to get to photograph all these amazing people in one night! Thank you Ralph and all the team!!! #RalphLauren #RL50 😊😊 #nickjonas #priyankachopra

A post shared by  Alexi Lubomirski photo (@alexilubomirski) on Sep 8, 2018 at 7:50pm PDT

  
 


 

 Fans instantly noticed the similarities in the pose, with some criticising Lubomirski for "trying to create" the royal couple's pose. 

 

 One user wrote: "shame on you for trying to recreate the photos of the wonderful Royals. Very tacky. Loved photos of Harry and Meghan but all you are going to do is set off a shit storm with debates on who looked better and who is better which has already happened. No one compares to the integrity and beauty of Harry and Meghan though (sic)"

 

 While others slammed the critics for being petty: "I
 t absolutely kills me how many people get so butt hurt over a damn pose! Are you kidding me?! Seriously, like nobody has ever had the same pose before! Damn, get over it or just keep scrolling! It's a STUNNING photo of two BEAUTIFUL people (sic).