Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal grandmother, viciously assaulted by a teenager, is still in pain with back and rib injuries and she cannot sit or sleep properly. 
Cabangile Ngcobo was assaulted by a teenager in Hluhluwe last month.
The incident went viral as the assault was recorded and shared via social media.
DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango visited Ngcobo at her home yesterday, promising to assist her to receive medical treatment later this week. 
Mncwango said he was shocked by the extent of the injuries Ngcobo had suffered to her back and ribs.

“That a child could assault an elderly person in such a manner is very concerning. We have problems of woman abuse and to see a young woman assaulting an elderly woman like that is shocking.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“A woman was assaulted in broad daylight and no one does anything. That the person recording the attack does nothing to stop the violence is shocking. Even when she tries to engage the parents of the child, she is not assisted,” said Mncwango. 
People in rural areas did not feel safe. “There is a lack of police presence in rural areas. Very often police arrive when someone is already dead.” 
Mncwango claimed that the matter was not just an isolated incident as other elderly people in the same area had alleged that they were also assaulted by young people. “They said they are afraid to call children to order as they might attack them. It’s important to protect these people.” 

Ngcobo relived the attack. “The girl and some boys had stolen home-made beer. When I confronted them the boys ran away but she didn’t and started insulting me.
“I went to report her to her mother but before I could speak to her mother, the girl came charging out like a wild animal and attacked me. She hit me all over. Even now I’m still not well.”
Ngcobo said she was very grateful for the visit by the DA.
“To all who have assisted me and done so much good for me, I am very grateful for that.” AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Some of the neighbours said they were shocked by what they saw in the video and wanted more accountability.
Ngcobo’s neighbour Mirriam Ngomane said: “We are not happy about what we saw, and even now the situation is still not well. 
“After Ngcobo was assaulted, she tried to address the matter with the mother of the child and was not well received,” she said. 
She said the matter had been reported to the local Induna and ward councillor. 

Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said a case of assault GBH had been opened the suspect was out on bail.
The Mercury