DURBAN - While looting of foreigners tuck shops was rife in Soweto this week, two foreign shop owners survived serious arson attacks in Durban this week.

 

 Arsonists attempted to burn them alive inside their tuck shops on Thursday. The incidents took place in KwaDabeka, near Pinetown and in Newlands West, to the north of Durban.

 

 KwaDabeka-based Ethiopian shopkeeper 
 Nathi Aathe, was sleeping in the Thursday night when his shop was attacked and set alight. He narrowly escaped and survived with minor injuries. 
 Four men armed with guns and petrol attacked his container and fled with R4000 after breaking in with an axe.
AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 

 "The broke their way through the store and pointed their firearm at me, the container was already on fire at that time. Others stood outside and kept shouting, 'Dubula 
 inja
  (shoot the dog)'. I pleaded with them not to take my life,
  after they had already taken more than R4000 from my safe, airtime machine and cigarettes, “ Aathe said. 

 

 
  
   
   
    John Ashatl who is the owner of the tuck shop was already refurbishing his container that was gutted by fire. Picture: Siboniso Mngadi
   
  

 Aathe’s
  brother, John Ashatl
  who is the owner of the tuck shop was already refurbishing his container that was gutted by fire,
  when Sunday Tribune visited the scene. He
  was adamant that he would give up on his shop.

 

 He recounted the fateful incidents he had endured since he came to Durban in 2012 while he was painting his burnt container. His shop has been attacked numerous times. 

 He said from time to time he had to start afresh because his shop was constantly attacked.  

 

 “We no longer fear for our lives because being attacked has become a norm in their lives. Government and police have failed us, our only hope is God,” said Ashatl.  

 

 In Soweto, the situation was volatile with widespread looting reported. 
 The police made arrests for murder after four people were killed during violent looting in White City. More than 10 people were 
 arrested and charged with public violence, said the police.

 

 It was claimed that the looting followed a warning that people in the community were sick and tired of the illicit goods being sold to them by foreign traders. 

 

 Later on Thursday, a Somalian shopkeeper from Newlands West was hospitalised
  following an attack while he was sleeping in his shop.

 

 According to 
 neighbours
 , attackers attempted to burn him alive inside his tuck shop. The container shop was doused in petrol and set alight at midnight.

 

 
  
  
   Foreign-owned looted shops amid allegations that they sold expired food and items with counterfeit labels. Picture: Bhekikhaya Mabaso/Africa News Agency/(ANA)
  
 

 Police spokesperson Thembeka Mbhele said cases of attempted murder and malicious damage to property were being investigated.

 

 Recently local
  shop owners in KwaMashu‚ Ntuzuma and Inanda have made threats to foreigners and gave
  them an ultimatum to leave. Looting of shops and arson took place in the northern townships of 
 Inanda and KwaMashu following the threats. 

 

 SUNDAY TRIBUNE