DURBAN - A DURBAN Metro police officer is set to swap his bullet-proof vest for a surgeon’s jacket on Tuesday night as he makes his acting debut on  e.TV's drama, Imbewu: The Seed.

Despite the switch between jobs, Captain Peter Keogh remains steadfast in one role: being a good Samaritan.
Keogh has donated all proceeds from his acting gig to the KwaMashu Christian Association’s old-age home.
The 62-year-old metro police officer has been in the law enforcement for the past 40 years. On Tuesday night he will star for the first time as a TV actor on the show which is filmed primarily in Durban.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 
 
  Captain Peter Keogh will appear on e.TV's TV drama Imbewu: The Seed and will donate his appearence fee to the KwaMashu Christian Association’s old-age home. Picture: Facebook 
 

Keogh will be the surgeon who attends to the character Pranav Rampersad who was recently in a car accident on the show.
A spokesperson for the TV drama, Zama Hadebe, said auditions took place in Durban where the show is filmed.

“(Keogh) takes on the role of a specialist surgeon, and is introduced after another character is in a car accident,” she said.
Hadebe could not say how long Keogh would be on-screen. But for Keogh, his debut was just a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the man who has been more vested with firearms in the past four decades.
His wife, Vicky who was also a metro officer, died while on duty two years ago.
Keogh has been devoting his time outside fighting crime to help charity organisations in Durban.

 
 
  Captain Peter Keogh will appear on e.TV's TV drama Imbewu: The Seed and will donate his appearence fee to the KwaMashu Christian Association’s old-age home. Picture: Facebook 
 

Last week he gave the cheque, received from Imbewu for his appearance on their show, to an old-age home in KwaMashu. During the handover, he was supported by some of the cast from the show, who also brought some goodies for the facility. 
Said Hadebe: “We provided food and toiletries, especially adult diapers which is something they needed the most. It was an emotional moment to see their happiness,” she added.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
SUNDAY TRIBUNE