DURBAN - WHEN CNN International travelled to South Africa to view Durban artist Lungelo Gumede’s life-sized waxworks of Nelson Mandela, the young sculptor was overjoyed at the prospect.
In honour of Mandela’s 100th birthday celebrations, Gumede has created a series of Mandela waxworks: 
“I started it last year when I heard there was going to be a celebration of 100 years for Mandela. As the whole country was trying to come up with ideas and projects, I decided to use what I have in my field, as a sculptor, to embrace 100 years of Madiba.”
Every inch of his sculptures are treated with immense care and precision. Gumede said he uses clay for the face, implants real human hair on the head and he inserts contact lenses for the eyes.
“Once I’m done with the head, then it’s on to the clothing. I do thorough research before beginning the statues. I go through pictures of Madiba and I look for the same clothing in the picture. The Madiba shirts I normally buy are very expensive. It’s around R2000 each. If I can’t find the same shirt, then I get someone to design it. Even the height of the statues, they are all 1,9 meters. I have to make sure it’s accurate.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The wax figures depict the different phases of Mandela’s life from his youth to his trial and imprisonment to his release from prison, his presidency and his retirement. For Gumede, the biggest challenge is capturing the life-like expressions. 
“To get the facial expressions as accurate as possible is where it can be challenging. It’s all different facial expressions of Madiba. There are statues of him talking, laughing, smiling, and frowning. The laughing figure took me forever. I had to redo it five times. I will never take it into production if I’m not satisfied.”
Speaking about his recent documentary which aired on African Voices which highlights some of Africa’s influential trendsetters, the artist said: 
“They contacted me and asked if they could cover my story and my art. So, of course I said yes. They sent a guy who was doing a documentary on me. For three full weeks, he was with me, shooting something which would eventually air for ten minutes. He would come to my studio and we would go sightseeing.”

The sculptures are popular throughout Durban and the rest of the country. Gumede said they are rented out for various events and in some cases, art lovers have made purchases.
With a studio at the BAT Centre, Gumede’s inspiration for the wax figures stems from the acclaimed Madame Tussauds which displays worldwide celebrities made out of wax. “After I went to New York and I visited Madame Tussauds, I saw the need to start the same thing here in South Africa."
Gumede said his next project is creating life-size sculptures of American musicians, Jay-Z and Beyoncé: 
“I’m currently working on Jay Z and Beyoncé because they’re coming down in December for the Global Citizen Festival. It’s hard work, especially when it comes to sculpting Beyoncé."AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY