What do we know about marijuana’s medical benefits? Two experts explain the evidence     for and against its use as a treatment. By Steven Kinsey and Divya Ramesh
While some researchers are investigating smoked or vaporised cannabis, most are looking at specific cannabis compounds, called cannabinoids.

From a research standpoint, cannabis is considered a “dirty” drug because it contains hundreds of compounds with poorly understood effects. That’s why researchers tend to focus on just one cannabinoid at a time. Only two plant-based cannabinoids, THC and cannabidiol, have been studied extensively, but there could be others with medical benefits we don’t know about yet.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

THC is the main active component of cannabis. It activates cannabinoid receptors in the brain, causing the “high” associated with cannabis, as well as in the liver, and other parts of the body. The only FDA-approved cannabinoids that doctors can legally prescribe are both lab-produced drugs similar to THC. They are prescribed to increase appetite and prevent wasting caused by cancer or Aids.

Cannabidiol (CBD), on the other hand, doesn’t interact with cannabinoid receptors. It doesn’t cause a high. Seventeen states in the US have passed laws allowing access to CBD for people with certain medical conditions.

Our bodies also produce cannabinoids,  endocannabinoids. Researchers are creating new drugs that alter their function, to better understand how cannabinoid receptors work. The goal of these studies is to discover treatments that can use the body’s own cannabinoids to treat conditions such as chronic pain and epilepsy, instead of cannabis itself.

Cannabis is promoted as a treatment for many medical conditions. We’ll take a look at two, chronic pain and epilepsy, to illustrate what we  know about its medical benefits.



*  Is it a chronic pain treatment?



Research suggests that some people with chronic pain self-medicate with cannabis. But  there is limited human research on whether cannabis or cannabinoids effectively reduce chronic pain. Research in people suggest that certain conditions, such as chronic pain caused by nerve injury, may respond to smoked or vaporised cannabis, as well as an FDA-approved THC drug. But, most of these studies rely on subjective self-reported pain ratings, a significant limitation.

An alternative research approach focuses on drug combination therapies, where an experimental cannabinoid drug is combined with an existing drug. For instance, a recent study in mice combined a low dose of a THC-like drug with an aspirin-like drug. 

The combination blocked nerve-related pain better than either drug alone.



*  Well-designed epilepsy studies are badly needed.



Despite some sensational news stories and widespread speculation on the internet, the use of cannabis to reduce epileptic seizures is supported more by research in rodents than in people. There are many anecdotes and surveys about the positive effects of cannabis flowers or extracts for treating epilepsy, but these aren’t the same thing as well-controlled clinical trials, which can tell us which types of seizure, if any, respond positively to cannabinoids and give us stronger predictions about how most people respond.

While CBD has gained interest as a potential treatment for seizures in people, the physiological link between the two is unknown. As with chronic pain, the few clinical studies have been done included very few patients. We also need to know more about the cannabinoid receptors in the brain and body, what systems they regulate, and how they could be influenced by CBD. For instance, CBD may interact with anti-epileptic drugs in ways we are still learning about.



*  Cannabis research is hard.



Well-designed studies are the most effective way for us to understand what medical benefits cannabis may have. But research on cannabis or cannabinoids is particularly difficult. In the US, cannabis and its related compounds, THC and CBD, are on Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act, which is for drugs with “no currently accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse”.





  *  To study cannabis, a researcher must first request permission at the state and federal level. 

Laboratory-based studies usually include only moderate to heavy users, who are likely to have formed some tolerance to marijuana’s effects and may not reflect the general population.



*  Cannabis not without risk.



Abuse potential is a concern with any drug that affects the brain, and cannabinoids are no exception. Cannabis is somewhat similar to tobacco, in that some people have great difficulty quitting. Like tobacco, it is a natural product that has been selectively bred to have strong effects on the brain and is not without risk. 

Although many cannabis users are able to stop using the drug without problem, 2% to 6% of users have difficulty quitting. 

Repeated use, despite the desire to decrease or stop using, is now known as a cannabis-use disorder. It is too soon to say for certain that the potential benefits of cannabis outweigh the risks. But with restrictions to cannabis (and cannabidiol) loosening at the state level, research is badly needed to get the facts in order. - The Conversation