Durban - Police management have hailed the arrests of three men, wanted for taxi-related murders across the province. The men were arrested during a multi-disciplinary operation on Monday, according to police. 

Commenting on the matter,KwaZulu-Natal Acting Provincial Commissioner, Major General Bheki Langa praised the team for the arrest of these most wanted suspects who were terrorising the community.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

According to police spokesperson, Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane, the two suspects were arrested at Shepstone Road, Durban. 

"One of them was found in possession of an unlicensed firearm and ammunition. They were linked to a number of murder cases including taxi related murders," Zwane said. 
He said further investigation led police to a house in KwaMakhutha area where they arrested a third suspect - also found in possession of an unlicensed firearm and ammunition. 
"He was also linked to a murder case at Umkomaas area this month. It is suspected that he may be linked to other murder cases reported at Umbumbulu  and the surroundings areas. These suspects have been on the run for over a year. The firearms that were seized will be subjected to ballistic tests to establish if they were used in any other crimes in the province," Zwane said.  

In one of the cases they were  allegedly involved in, three people were shot and killed at Odidini area, Umbumbulu in August 2017. The three victims, Thamsanqa Dlamuka (43), Mduduzi Dlamuka (29) and Thabiso Dlamuka (16) were alleged shot and killed while they were walking along a gravel road. They were also wanted for a case where Sizwe Maphumulo, Wanda Makhanya and Menziwa Zondo were shot and killed while at the Odidini taxi rank in May 2017. All arrested suspects aged between 22 and 26 years appeared in the Umbumbulu Magistrates Court and Umlazi Magistrates Court today and they were remanded in custody until 20 April 2018 for bail application.

Langa said they were pleased about the arrests. 
"We are happy that these cold blooded killers have been removed from society and we will do everything within our control to ensure that they remain in custody until the finalisation of their trail,” Langa said. 
The Mercury