Durban - Customers who loved collecting Little Shop mini products are in for a welcome surprise as Checkers today launches a brand new collectable campaign consisting of environmentally-friendly Little Garden seedling kits. 

The group's Brand Publicity Manager, Angelique Wagner, said with the Little Garden, Checkers hopes to encourage children and adults to get outside and spend some quality time together as they tend to their seedlings, and learn to grow their own fresh herbs, veggies and flowers.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

"Customers will be rewarded with one Little Garden seedling kit for every R150 spent in a Checkers or Checkers Hyper store. There are 24 different seedlings to collect including eight veggies, eight flowers and eight herbs. Each seedling kit includes a small biodegradable pot, a soil pod, seed paper and a pop-out name tag," she said. 

Wagner said all the materials used in the Little Garden seedling kits are compostable or recyclable: the biodegradable pots are made of wood pulp and peat; the seeds are all natural and the soil pods are made of coconut husk.

"Customers also have the opportunity to buy a limited edition collectors’ case to keep all their seedlings in one place until they sprout. Additional Little Garden merchandise available for sale includes mini garden tools and gardening gloves," she said. 

There are also some big prizes up for grabs with Little Garden. Customers who collect all 24 Little Garden seedling kits stand a chance of winning one of 20 Checkers vouchers worth R5 000. Additionally, school choirs who prove that they are the best at singing the Checkers Little Garden song could be one of three choirs to win a share of R60 000 for their school. Lastly, customers who buy any three participating brands stand a chance to win a Food Tour to Italy worth R100 000. 

Checkers Little Garden is available from 23 April 2018 while stocks last. It is available exclusively at all Checkers and Checkers Hyper stores. Purchases at MediRite Pharmacies, Checkers LiquorShop and Money Market counters are not eligible for Little Garden seedling kits.

Little gardeners are encouraged to visit www for www.checkerslittlegarden.co.za for more information.

The Mercury