Durban - EThekwini DA councillor Heinz De Boer has resigned from his position as deputy caucus leader, less than two weeks after he was elected into the post.

The Mercury understands that the resignation is as a result of tensions between De Boer and caucus leader Nicole Graham.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

DA councillors who spoke on condition of anonymity expressed concern that the resignation could lead to more rifts within the caucus. 

The composition of the DA's eThekwini caucus leadership sparked controversy recently with some leaders in the party complaining that it lacked racial diversity.

Contacted for comment De Boer confirmed the resignation but would not elaborate on reasons behind it saying it is an internal matter. "However I can say that it has nothing to do with the diversity debate that is going on," he said.
However De Boer remains as a councillor in the municipality.

Graham also confirmed having received the resignation letter last night but said she had not had a chance to meet with De Boer to find out what his reasons were.

Anonymous sources claimed that the the relationship between the two leaders took a turn for the worst shortly after the election into the positions.

“Less than 48 hours after she was elected as leader she made moves to have Heinz and Sharon [Hoosen] removed from Exco,” said a source.

The DA has three positions at the eThekwini executive committee (Exco). Before the election of the caucus leadership, provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango occupied one of the seats with the other two being occupied by De Boer and Hoosen. After Mncwango was sworn in as a member of the provincial legislature, the DA notified council that it intended to have Graham as Mncwango’s replacement.

Sources claimed that she wants De Boer and Hoosen removed in favour of some of her allies in the caucus. 

Graham said she had made recommendations about the representations at Exco to the party’s Federal Executive. She however declined to say what those recommendations were stating that she has not received any response yet and thus the matter is an internal Federal Executive matter.
The Mercury