Durban - Motorists have been warned to stay away from the Durban CBD for the rest of the week, as three marches taking place this week are expected to bring traffic to a standstill.
Metro Police spokesperson Senior-Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad, said they would be out in full force to safeguard the public as the SA Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) marches from King Dinuzulu Park, down Dr Pixley Kaseme (West) Street to the city hall today. 

The National Funeral Practitioners Association of South Africa and an unrelated group of nurses will march along the same route this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mangosuthu University of Technology students will also march through the streets of Durban on Friday, said Sewpersad. 

Saftu is expected to have the biggest turnout, with 3000 members of their 14 affiliates in KwaZulu-Natal expected to turn up for the march. 

This is part of a nationwide “shutdown” to protest the proposed amendments to the Labour Relations Act, which Saftu believes would make it more difficult for workers to strike. 

The federation is also opposing the proposed “slavery” minimum wage of R3500, labour brokers and outsourcing. 

Saftu’s August Mbhele said they had met with the taxi driver’s organisation Qhina Mshayeli which had agreed to join the march. 

However, Qhina Mshayeli chairman Clement Doncabe said they would not be able to organise and join the march due to the very reason the march was taking place. 

“We do not enjoy protection under the very laws Saftu is marching against. It will be up to each individual taxi driver to decide if he takes part in the march but as an organisation we cannot ask them to risk their jobs, knowing what kind of circumstances they work under,” he said. 

Saftu also appealed to rival federation Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu)to join them. 

However, Cosatu issued a statement saying they will not be part of the march as they supported the national minimum wage. 

“We have no reason to strike over something that will benefit the workers. 

“The minimum wage will be a huge achievement that will see wages rise for the 47% of workers - 6million - who earn less than R20 an hour currently. This represents the foundation that will help us build towards the goal of a living wage. 

“The strike is based on fabrication, misrepresentation and outlandish conspiracy theories.”

The Federation of Unions of South Africa (Fedusa) also distanced itself from the march.
The Mercury