Durban - The Draft Integrated Development Plan (IDP) for the next financial year, from 1 July 2018 – 30 June 2019, is available for comment and the public are urged to provide their input into this important city strategy. 

The IDP is the key strategic document which guides and informs all planning, budgeting, management and decision-making related to delivering services and development in the municipal area. The plan is a requirement of the Municipal Systems Act of 2000 and is reviewed annually. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The strategic approach of the Integrated Development Plan (IDP) is underpinned by city’s Long Term Development plan and is also informed by global, national and provincial policies such as the New Urban Agenda, Sustainable Development Goals, the National Development Plan and the Provincial Growth and Development strategy. 

The IDP consists of eight plans that will help the city achieve its vision of becoming Africa’s most caring and livable city. These plans are all inter-related and include Developing and sustaining our spatial, natural and built environment; Developing a prosperous, diverse economy and employment creation; Creating a quality living environment; Fostering a socially equitable environment; Creating a platform for growth, supporting organisational design, human capital development and management; A vibrant and creative city, the foundation for sustainability and social cohesion; Fostering good governance and responsive local government and Creating a financially accountable and sustainable city.

Each plan has a set of deliverables which informs the city’s budget and by which the city’s performance is monitored. The formulation of the city’s budget takes the above plans into account so as to ensure that the city’s strategic objectives are achieved. 

A Service Delivery Budget Implementation Plan (SDBIP) is thereafter compiled to monitor the implementation of the various programmes and projects contained within each plan. The SDBIP provides both financial as well as non-financial performance indicators which are used to monitor and evaluate quarterly and yearly service delivery targets. This document also forms part of the IDP. 

The Draft IDP is available on the municipality’s website www.durban.gov.za and will also be placed in Municipal Libraries and Sizakala Centres. Comments can be sent to Puven Akkiah, email Puvendra.Akkiah@durban.gov.za. The closing date for comments is May 4. 

The Mercury