Durban - The National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) has rejected claims that the primary source of the listeriosis outbreak is still unknown, and that Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi has backed down on his previous announcement that the source had been identified.
This follows an independent investigation instituted by implicated Rainbow Chicken Limited (RCL), which found that its Wolwehoek polony plant in the Free State was clear of the outbreak strain of listeria, L monocytogenes ST6, which has caused most listeriosis cases.

The firm recalled ready-to-eat products and temporarily closed the plant as a precautionary measure last month after Motsoaledi said the listeriosis outbreak, which has claimed 183 lives, had been traced to the Wolwehoek plant and Tiger Brand’s Enterprise facility in Polokwane.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Of major concern are the claims that the primary source of the outbreak is still unknown. The statements the minister of health has made have emanated from epidemiologic and scientific investigations conducted by the NICD,” the institute said.  

“The implication that the NICD has misled the minister of health and the public is rejected. We condemn the statement made that the government prematurely scapegoated ‘Enterprise and Rainbow’ without sufficient evidence.” The institute said an intensive process of trying to identify the source of the outbreak was undertaken, with 86% of affected patients reporting eating polony in the month before falling ill with listeriosis. 

A breakthrough came when a group of nine children attending the same crèche in Soweto developed febrile gastroenteritis in January. 

The outbreak strain was identified in one child and in three samples of two brands of polony from the refrigerator at the crèche. Enterprise Foods’ Polokwane facility was visited by experts and extensive testing was done. 

The L monocytogenes ST6 outbreak strain was found in the post-cooking processing environment, and also on the final polony products. 

Additional results from samples of products produced at the Enterprise Polokwane production facility and sold at the Enterprise Germiston factory shop tested positive for the outbreak strain. 

“This means that the outbreak strain has been found inside the ready-to-eat processed meat products manufactured at Enterprise Foods’ Polokwane production facility, dispelling claims made to the contrary.”

In response to the NICD, RCL Foods’ Stephen Heath said: “The statement by the NICD confirms our assertion that the RCL Foods plant, or Rainbow polony, was not the source of the outbreak.” 
The Mercury