Durban - The Zakifo Music Festival represents the united South Africa we want to see, 
says co-ordinator Gabriella Peppas.  
Co-ordinator Gabriella Peppas says the music event attracts a strong contingent of local and international artists.

“There are four distinct concerts. Zakifo’s early Friday event is eclectic and will be headlined by icon Sipho ‘Hotstix’ Mabuse. It’s a fund-raiser for the Nelson Mandela Foundation, and he was one of Madiba’s favourite artists. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Later that evening is a more youth-focused roof concert at a venue in Greyville, with performances by the likes of DJ Lag and Nasty C.

“On the Saturday we have a mixed bag of performers, including a Japanese group who use traditional instruments to play dub (which has a sound similar to reggae) music. We also bring back popular Zakifo acts.

“Sunday is our festival day. There will be two stages on the beach at Blue Lagoon, loads of stalls, and a great family atmosphere. The line-up has something for everybody.”

Peppas says the event draws visitors from Gauteng and Mozambique but is strongly supported by locals. 

“This isn’t a destination festival, families don’t have to travel, as it’s so urban and it therefore attracts the locals. 

“That said, it attracts a cross-section of people. It’s an amazing and beautiful event. The diversity in music promotes social cohesion.”

She says while there are some big names, this should not be the only drawcard, “Come discover something new. If you are open to it, this is music to fall in love with.”



VENUES:

The Zakifo Festival will be spread across three iconic Durban venues - the BAT Centre, Views
@Twenty5 and Blue Lagoon Beach.

Kicking off the festival on the Friday night, the fund-raising concert for the Nelson Mandela Foundation will be at the BAT Centre.

It will feature Sekou Kouyate, a renowned kora player from Guinea, and Elida Almeida, a young Cape Verdean folk singer. Headlining  is Mabuse. This event is ticketed separately from the rest of the festival.

The festivities move to Views @Twenty5 in Morningside for the rest of Friday night and Saturday night. This rooftop venue offers panoramic views of Durban, the perfect backdrop for the evening’s performances by Nasty C, DJ Lag, Flavia Coelho, Nathalie Natiembé, DJ Doowap, Oki Dub Ainu Band and K-$.

Zakifo returns to Blue Lagoon Beach on Sunday for the final day of the festival, with Alice Phoebe Lou, Nakhane, Dub Inc, Guy Buttery and Kanada Narahari, and international act Aloe Blacc.

Best known for his hit single I Need A Dollar and for featuring on Avicii’s Wake Me Up, Blacc has prove himself a singer/songwriter with an irresistible power to capture human emotions.

Each year, a host of satellite events, workshops and parties linked to the festival occur in the week leading up to the main event. 

These are industry-focused and act as a platform for exchanging knowledge and experiences, a bridge between established industry professionals and up-and-coming artists.

Zakifo aspires to strengthen ties between the cultural communities of the Indian Ocean through its sister festival, Sakifo, held each year in Réunion. Zakifo, founded by Jerome Galabert, Sipho Sithole and Andy Davis, is a member of the Igoda music festival circuit, which includes Sakifo Festival in Réunion, Azgo Festival in Mozambique, Bassline Africa Day concert in Johannesburg and Bushfire Festival in Swaziland. 

These festivals happen over three weeks in May and June and have created an artist and festival-goer touring circuit in the Southern African region.

“Zakifo is a destination festival, a people-to-people encounter, and we guarantee you that over the years this festival will become part of travellers’ annual calendar coming from all over the world,” said Sipho Sithole, one of the festival partners and 
founder/owner of Native Rhythms.

 

Tickets are available via Nutickets:

R500 - Three-day weekend pass (excluding Madiba concert).

R150 - Friday pass -Views
@Twenty5.

R150 - Saturday pass - Views
@Twenty5.

R300 - Sunday pass - Blue Lagoon Beach.

R300 - Friday Madiba concert - BAT Centre

Visit: www.zakifo.com

Instagram: @zakifofest

Twitter: @zakifomusikfest

Facebook: @zakifofest
The Mercury