Durban - Making maths and science cool. That is the goal of  two University of KwaZulu-Natal graduates who have excelled in their respective fields.
Dr Sanele Dlamini, 33, of Umlazi, obtained his PhD in physics despite his only distinction in matric being in Zulu. 

“I didn’t realise my full ­potential until I got to UKZN. I even had to upgrade my matric just to qualify to get into the Bachelor of Science Degree programme. I think part of my average performance was that we were told physics is hard, and that if you’re good at it, you’re a nerd.”ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Dlamini has now made it his goal to make education cool, and plans to give motivational talks to young people with the Phumlani Dube Foundation. 

“I want to be an inspiration to young people, especially from the townships, that if I can get a doctorate in physics, then they can, too. 

“It’s good that the government is pushing maths and science, but there needs to be more awareness about the many different career prospects,” he said. 

Having been a full-time student since 2005, Dlamini said one of his major challenges was finances as he was married with three young children. 

“My wife, parents and siblings supported me through it all, because they also believed in my dream to continue studying until PhD level,” he said. 

It was also family that pulled Njabulo Mkhize through the struggles of pursuing a masters degree tackling Einstein’s theories. 

Graduating with a Master of Science in Applied Mathematics cum laude, Mkhize reflected on the difficulties of coping with university stress and financial troubles at home, which affected his studies and wellbeing. 

“‘My way out was to dedicate more time to my books and to stay positive. It also helped to have a hard-working and supportive supervisor who helped not only academically, but also financially,” he said.

To current students, he ­advised: “Don’t limit yourself. When you see the opportunity, seize it because it might not come along again.” The trailblazers in the science and maths fields are following in the footsteps of Trueman Tandabantu Goba, who was the first black civil engineering graduate at UKZN in 1979. 

Goba, a founder member of Hatch Goba - one of the world’s largest international civil engineering consultancies, was conferred with an honorary doctorate in engineering by his alma mater yesterday. 

In his speech, Goba reflected on how under-serviced Chesterville, Clermont and Inanda - the townships he grew up in - were. “Although we live in a democracy today, as a country we have come out of an extremely difficult history. We continue to live in a country with remarkable deprivation and destitution, and the question is how the situation will improve.”

Goba was part of the first commission that set out to ­create a vision for 2030, and the National Development Plan (NDP). 

He believes that for the NDP’s objectives to be met, it is imperative that more highly educated and skilled professionals be produced so that they can play a role in leadership, management and technical matters. 

“We need to compete in the world by being productive, and should be building ­quality companies and institutions of government, and encouraging new professionals who are ethical and can be trusted as advisers,” said Goba. 

He also called for politicians to be challenged on their governance failures, including a lack of planning, failure to lead, failure to ensure value for money and failure to monitor performance. - Mercury Reporter