Durban - The South African Police Service (SAPS) and the State Information Technology Agency (Sita) have implemented contingency plans after Forensic Data Analysis (FDA), a company owned by former police officer turned businessman Keith Keating, shut down certain infrastructure systems within the SAPS for failure of payment.
Keating said the SAPS and Sita owed his company in excess of R70 million for services rendered since December. 

“How can anyone expect FDA to continue rendering the services when they have not paid for four to five months? It is totally unreasonable to expect this,” Keating said. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) said it was “shocked and disappointed” with the fact that one man could hold the whole country to ransom by having the power to switch off the criminal justice system. 

In November last year, Scopa and Independent Police Investigative Directorate(Ipid) instructed the police to stop paying FDA because of questions around the legality of contracts between the company and Sita, which procures IT equipment on behalf of government.

According to FDA, they have provided Property Control and Exhibit Management (PCEM) and Firearm Permit System (FPS) services to the police, while the police did not pay any of the invoices issued to it from December 1 until March 31.

On Wednesday this week, FDA released a statement saying they would bring the criminal justice system to a halt if they did not get paid by midnight. 

True to their word, Keating confirmed that the PCEM, FPS and VA-AMIS systems were suspended at midnight after receiving no payment. 

According to FDA, those systems affect the following: 

 Police officials may be unable to check in and out for duty;

 Police officers may be unable to lawfully possess or use firearms;

 Firearms and ammunition in possession of SAPS may not be accounted for during the suspension period;

 Police officials may be unable to access and manage evidence in the Forensic Science Laboratory;

 The chain of custody may be broken for millions of exhibits in the Forensic Science Laboratory;

 The NPA may be unable to remove evidence to be used in court proceedings; and

 South Africa may be in breach of certain international treaties involving Interpol and the UN.

“The above list is not exhaustive,” the statement reads.

“We can confirm that certain systems have indeed been shut down and while the shutting down of the said systems is likely to affect the efficiency of certain operations within the SAPS, they, however, do not completely bring operations to a halt,” SAPS spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said in a statement yesterday. 

He said they were also seeking legal advice on the matter and “will not be giving out specifics” given that there are serious security implications, and they may potentially need to act on the legal advice if necessary. 

Chairperson of Scopa Themba Godi said the situation raises the question of whether SAPS is renting this equipment from FDA or owns it “because from what the committee understands FDA is said to be handling the maintenance of this system only”.

“Therefore it is really puzzling as to why one man can have such power over equipment that is owned by the government. If this equipment has been bought by the government, what gives FDA the right to switch it off?” Godi asked .

Godi also questioned the nature of the contract entered into with FDA, calling it   “a betrayal of the national interest” .

 He said Scopa is scheduled to meet with SAPS to clarify matters in light of the latest shenanigans by FDA.

Keating is also facing allegations that he bribed former acting police commissioner Khomotso Phahlane to gain contracts from the police. He allegedly paid for Phahlane’s vehicles.

The contract was brought into the spotlight during a Scopa meeting last year  when DA MP Tim Brauteseth produced pictures of Keating with two police officers from the police’s supply chain management department in personalised Manchester United jerseys in the football club’s trophy room and outside their storied ground Old Trafford. In December Keating denied these allegations, and said it was part of an attempted hostile take-over of his business.

The DA shadow minister of police Zakhele Mbhele said it was outrageous that the country’s national security and integrity was being held to ransom.

Mbhele said that Commissioner Khehla Sitole was obligated, as the chief accounting officer, to ensure that he enforces the recommendation made by Ipid to terminate all contracts with FDA.

“The recklessness of the threat made by Keith Keating, the director of FDA, to ‘collapse the criminal justice system’ if SAPS fails to adhere to his demands, is testament to the evolving crisis of chronic mismanagement within SAPS,” he said.
The Mercury