Durban - KwaZulu-Natal acting police commissioner 
Major-General Bheki Langa has appointed a high-level team to investigate the efficiency and adequacy of police officers and private security personnel who were on duty when angry fans went on a rampage after the Nedbank Cup semifinal match at Moses Mabhida Stadium on Saturday night.
This comes as the Premier Soccer League laid blame squarely on the police for the violence. 

At a media briefing yesterday, PSL chairperson Irvin Khoza said the role of the venue organising committee (VOC) and the SAPS would need to be looked at.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He said they were of the view that there had been inadequate 
security to deal with the rampage.

Khoza also pointed out that at several meetings held with political parties and the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, the league had raised concerns about the role of the SAPS.

He said it was a fact that the risk of public safety at football matches and events around the country had been escalating.

“It has been incumbent on the PSL, in its capacity as the controlling body and occasionally event organiser, to bring this to the attention of the minister. 

“The involvement of the SAPS is impacting negatively on compliance with the Sasrea (Safety at Sports and Recreational Events) Act,” Khoza said.

He insisted the police were responsible for the entire planning process and were in charge on match day. 

Khoza said that on Saturday there was a failure by the VOC commander of SAPS to deploy adequate policing resources.

“The VOC commander is the only one that can issue an instruction. If he doesn’t, nobody can move.

“Another thing is that for this particular game, this authorised member (the commander) did not attend the first planning meeting. 

“He only arrived on the day. Now, how can you implement something you were not part of from the beginning? These are things we are going to raise yet again with the minister,” he  said.

Khoza was questioned as to why it took the PSL long periods of time before clubs were punished or unruly fans were brought to book.

For instance, it had taken the league 14 months before penalising Orlando Pirates for crowd violence at Loftus Versfeld in Pretoria when they were humiliated in a 6-0 loss to Mamelodi Sundowns in February last year.

“It is not that simple. As you know, there are lawyers involved when it comes to appearing before a disciplinary committee, and the facts must be presented.

“There is always a report missing - the one from the VOC commander. For the league, a report from the match commissioner is enough, but in terms of the Sasrea  Act, we must have the report from the authorised member of the SAPS,” said Khoza.

He said the league was mulling over a decision to approach Parliament for a review of the Sasrea Act which could allow for the PSL to have some juris-
diction in dealing with hooligans.

“This act has a lot of challenges. You must submit your calendar for an event six months before the game. But if the league finishes in May or June, as is always the case, and then starts again in August, it means we are already in breach of the act because of the timelines in the league. 

“What must we do?

“The minister said that perhaps the act was done for major events like the World Cup (in 2010, when South Africa was the host), but it has created problems for local events, particularly football games.”   

The Mercury understands that, according to the security plan for the match, the SAPS and guards from three private security companies were to be responsible for security inside the stadium while metro police officers were deployed in the vicinity of the stadium.

A total of 473 private security guards from three companies
had been hired for the match on Saturday.

A source at the metro police said it was clear that the police were lacking resources, and did not have enough capacity to provide the required security inside the stadium.

“They do not want to admit it but it is clear that they could use some help from metro police. But I guess they (the SAPS) are too arrogant to admit it.”

Khoza apologised to all the stakeholders, including those injured, the broadcasters and the sponsors, for the violence, which he said had no place in South African football.

Provincial police spokesperson Jay Naicker said the acting provincial police commissioner had appointed a high-level team to probe the matter. 

“We will be probing if the deployment of SAPS, private security personnel and other security agencies were in place according to the plan and whether those that were deployed to provide security at the event reacted as they were expected to and whether they were in a position to prevent the hooliganism and criminality that unfolded,” he said. 
The Mercury