Durban - All eyes are on the DA federal executive this week as it is ­expected to decide on the fate of embattled Cape Town mayor ­Patricia de Lille.
 DA federal council chairperson James Selfe said the party had asked De Lille to ­explain why it should not remove her from her post.

The DA has been at loggerheads with De Lille following allegations of misconduct and maladministration, for which the party charged her in January.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In February, she survived a motion of no confidence by the DA after she was backed by the ANC and a number of DA councillors.

Last week the party’s caucus voted for De Lille’s removal in an internal secret ballot.

The caucus has since asked the DA federal executive to boot her out.

De Lille could also be expelled from the party should she defy an instruction to leave office.

Selfe confirmed that the party’s top brass would use the organisation’s newly established accountability clause if needed.

The so-called “De Lille­ clause” was recently included in the DA’s constitution during its federal congress.

It provides for the termination of the membership of public representatives who refuse to step down within 48 hours after being instructed to do so by the federal executive.

Representations

Selfe said the DA leadership was still waiting for De Lille to make representations as to why she should not be removed from her post.

“We are the ones dealing with the matter now. The caucus has recommended that we remove her, but she has not sent her representations yet. 

“We are still waiting for that process to unfold before we take the decision,” Selfe said. But De Lille has vowed to fight against her removal, indicating that the vote of no confidence against her was just the beginning of ­another round.

“I’m always ready for a fight for fairness. I have fought for freedom in this country, so really we will just go on,” De Lille said after she lost the motion.

She accused the DA of trying to purge her on baseless ­allegations, and of applying the clause retrospectively.

“The vote of no confidence should be based on what happened after the congress, from April 9 onwards. But they brought up a whole load of stuff and definitions,” she said.

Selfe said the party ­expected De Lille to accuse it of wrongly applying the clause.
The Mercury