From dressing dolls to making over the wardrobes of professionals, Durban image consultant and stylist Daniyel Berry said she loves giving people a boost of confidence.
Berry, 41, graduated from Natal Technikon with a diploma in fashion design and technology in 1997. Her business, Style Me, is based in Berea where she consults with clients across the province.

Berry said she always had a keen interest in fashion.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“My mom is a fashion designer, and my dad is a graphic designer, so the genes were strong. There was no escaping the creativity.” 

Berry’s career started at the age of 5, when she’d cut up her mother’s fabrics and make dresses for her sister.

Previously a fashion designer and merchandiser of 10 years, Berry met her husband while on sabbatical and decided to start a family. “My husband’s business took strain with a large client not paying, which left us in a difficult situation.” Berry decided to start her own business, Style Me, to help out financially when her son was less than a year old. 

“It has been challenging running a business with children, but it has given me the flexitime Sometimes you feel like you’re on a treadmill but I wouldn’t change it for the world,” she said.

The fast-paced world of fashion paired with a passion for helping people makes for Berry’s dream job. “Every day is different in this industry, and that’s what I love. Apart from that, I also love to help people, I love seeing them grow and build their confidence.”

Of her job, Berry says: “It entails having one-on-one consultations with clients (men and women). This includes anything from colour and figure analysis, to a wardrobe audit or a shopping spree. 

The Makeover My Wardrobe process is one of Berry’s most popular packages. 

“This starts at 9am and finishes at 6pm. We start our day by analysing what colours suit your skin tone, eye colour and hair colour. I work with the four seasons, which show various tones of colour. 

“We work out whether you fall into a cool or warm spectrum, and find the colours which give you a glow to your skin or make your eyes pop. After all, the colours we wear reflect on to our skin and into our eyes. My clients receive their own personalised colour cards.”

In a world where social media has such a firm grip on society, Berry takes pride in being authentic.

“Today with social media, people want ‘real’, they want to be able to tap into your personal life. I love the Simon Sineks quote: ‘People do business with people’, not your logo. For me, I am the brand of my company and people do business with me because they can relate to me. I am human. I am a mom, I am no Barbie doll, I am an empathetic person who does not judge anyone or anything.” 

Berry outlined the hottest trends for winter 2018: 



Capsule wardrobe

To create a winter capsule wardrobe, invest in clothing items that will last the next five to 10 years. This means buying the best quality items that may be more expensive. 

“I have a leather jacket that I splurged on a few years ago that I wear at least three times a week, so it was definitely worth it,” says Berry. “The items often appear to be monochrome and slightly boring, but they will form the basis of your outfits as well as add to them. “The items in your capsule should include black and charcoal jeans, basic long-sleeved tops in various colours of the season, three to four jackets, scarves to spice up your outfits, block-heeled boots, pumps and sneakers. If you are more of a dress or skirt person, swop out the jeans for what you prefer.”

Each season, add five new pieces to your capsule, they do not have to be expensive items.

 “It could be something as simple as a new bag or earrings in the trending colour of the season,” said Berry.

Red 

Elegant and sophisticated, red is the key colour of the winter season. Designers draped their models head-to-toe in red at the Fall/Winter 2017-18 fashion shows. Everything from ruffled silk chiffon gowns to pant suits and coats were strut down the runway. 

Dressing so boldly is not for everyone. Those who are still easing into the trend can still make a statement by taking a more low key approach. 

“Red is very much a colour that draws attention. Try incorporating the trend into your wardrobe by wearing nail polish, lipstick or accessories in a bold red colour before you commit to buying something more pricey.” 



Animal print
Animal print


Animal print is “in” in a big way. Berry said: “It is often seen in big fur jackets and coats. But for a more subtle take on the trend, you can always go for scarf or head-wrap.”



Belts

Belts have always been a wardrobe staple. This season, they’ve really surged in popularity. Outfits immediately appear more “put together” and stylish once a belt is added. 

From mom jeans paired with a big buckle to flowey dresses made more flattering with a skinny belt around the waist, “belts are here to elevate our outfits”, said Berry,



Cowboy look

Cowboy boots, a signature staple for country singers and festival-goers alike, have made a comeback. In 2018, the boots pair well with 1970s-style dresses, dark jeans and slouchy sweaters.

Keeping with the cowboy theme, tassels are featuring on anything and everything from earrings to skirts. But if you aren’t ready for full-on fringe, start by subtly incorporating a tasselled accessory to your outfit and then work your way up to a big statement piece - a brown suede jacket with fringe perhaps?



Plaids and tweed

A fabric once affiliated with Coco Chanel and British royalty, tweed has traded its conservative, haughty image for something more chic this winter. Tweed is often seen in coats and pleated skirts so try pairing it with something unexpected to break up the look - an elegant dress, leather skirt or denim jacket would do the trick.
Leather

Leather jackets are a classic winter wardrobe staple as they pair well with most outfits. However, if you’re looking to break away from the ordinary, soft leather dresses, pants could be what you’re looking for.
Tassle jacket




High-shine look

 

From glitter and sequins to patent leather and metallics, the futuristic “high shine” look is the perfect way to make a statement. You can choose to dress it up or tone it down, depending on how you wear it. Take a metallic skirt from the day, paired with a T-shirt tucked in and sneakers, to the night,  by pairing it with a leather jacket and heels.
The Mercury