Durban - Peace talks within the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal hang in the balance as warring factions have disagreed on whether an elective conference should be held in the next few weeks or postponed beyond next year’s general elections.
Supporters affiliated with provincial interim committee (PIC) co-ordinator, Sihle Zikalala, insist the conference should be held either at the end of this month or early next month.

Divisions in the KZN ANC were laid bare after a high court judgment found the provincial executive committee had been an illegitimate structure.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Currently there are those members who are seen as being pro-Zikalala and those who support former ANC provincial premier Senzo Mchunu.

Mchunu, who publicly supported President Cyril Ramaphosa at the party’s national conference in Nasrec, has since been deployed as the chairperson of organising and campaigns ahead of the 2019 national elections within the party.

Mchunu supporters, who gathered in Durban on Monday, said the province was not ready for the elective conference, because some members had been sidelined from participating in branch general meetings (BGMs).

The supporters, who attended a meeting at the Durban beachfront, said they were ANC members in eThekwini Region and claimed they had been sidelined through gatekeeping from participating in the party’s meetings in 43 branches.

The ANC had issued an instruction that no conference should be held between June and the elections, to give structures of the party time to focus on campaigns.

“All people who are perceived to be supporters of President Cyril Ramaphosa have been removed from the voters’ roll because the regional leadership is manipulating processes so that we would not participate in the provincial conference,” said Sthenjwa Nyawose.

Gun-wielding

Other ANC activists in Moses Mabhida Region in the KZN Midlands also called for the postponement of the conference as they also accused Zikalala’s camp of gatekeeping. 

Last week they had a fight with gun-wielding bodyguards of provincial and regional leaders as they were trying to storm a meeting which was discussing issues of the conference. 

Nyawose, who is also an ANC councillor at the eThekwini Municipality, said the formation of the PIC, whose convener Mike Mabuyakhulu is their leader, was wrong.

Nyawose said peace talks would collapse if the province held the conference without 
attending to grievances.

“There should be no hurry for the conference because even the provincial task team can lead campaigns for the elections.

“We must first deal with people who do not appear on the ANC voters’ roll while they have applied to renew membership,” he said.

The PIC was formed after the ANC’s national executive committee had suspended the provincial executive committee following the Pietermaritzburg High Court ruling that it was an illegitimate structure.

“We are calling for the conference not to sit because as members of the ANC we have been locked out of the party. If they continue with the conference we are going to challenge them in court,” he said.

The PIC, the term of which ends in the next six days, was formed in February for a three-month period when it was supposed to facilitate unity talks and preparations for the conference which was suppose to sit this month.

The eThekwini redgional secretary, Bheki Ntuli, who backs Zikalala, insisted that the conference would be held “either at month end or early next month”.

“We are aware of the problem raised by 43 branches, which have been attended to. 

“Currently, BGMs are sitting in preparations for the conference, which should sit,” he said.

Ntuli said peace talks were continuing through five-aside and 10-aside teams representing both camps. 
The Mercury