Durban - More than 2000 women were screened in a mass Pap Smear Drive launched by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health. On Saturday, the women made their way to the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital where the screening was conducted.  Among the first 200 women to get screened at least 10 had been found to have symptoms of cervical cancer. 

The initiative is part of the department’s Phila Ma campaign which serves to create awareness about breast and cervical cancers. The mass drive also broke the record for the number of Pap Smears done in one place on the same day in South Africa or on the African continent.

Both cervical and breast cancer are preventable and can be successfully treated if women present at health facilities regularly, and get screened so that interventions can be made early if cancer is found.

One of the mechanisms of testing for cervical cancer is the Pap Smear, which is a simple screening for precancerous cells which could lead to cervical cancer if left untreated. Regular screening can greatly reduce a woman's risk of dying from cervical cancer.

In its quest to detect cervical cancer early, the department uses Liquid-Based Cytology (LBC), which is considered to be an alternative to conventional cytological investigations. With LBC, a spatula or brush/broom-like device is used to collect cells (in the same way as for conventional cytology), and then the cells are put into a liquid medium and transported to the laboratory for processing and reading .

This ensures a good quality and clean slide which is easier to interpret, and reduces the need for repeat pap smear thus saving costs. With the strengthening of early detection, there will be fewer cases of advanced cancer that will require chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery.

The department, in partnership with the University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) and the Cancer Association of South Africa (CANSA) is mobilising women at eThekwini and surrounding areas to be part of this screening drive which will manned by volunteers including specialists, doctors, nurses and ordinary citizens.
Cervical cancer affects 1 in 40 women, and kills up to 3500 women per year; while breast cancer affects 1 in 26 women in South Africa.

The Mercury