South Africa and India are tapping into their shared histories to grow business relations.
The two-day business summit, which was held at the Sandton Convention Centre, ends Monday.

Its aim was to build better business partnerships between the two countries.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Sunday night the summit paid a visual tribute to Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi, which was choreographed by the United Nations Children’s Fund’s ­goodwill ambassador, Gavin Rajah. 

The summit was about much more than paying tribute to the two great men, said the co-chairperson of the South Africa-India CEO forum, Vivian Reddy, adding that the main aim of the summit was to address issues that affected
the running of “big business” between the two countries. 

“The message that came loud and clear today is that South Africa can learn a lot from India. India has great ­expertise in agriculture, and they are prepared to share their expertise,” Reddy said. 

Partnerships

“A lot of Indian companies want to come to South Africa and form joint partnerships.” 

Reddy said another area the two countries could learn from each other was in the energy space. 

“India also has its own ­energy problems.

“Indian companies are willing to come in and invest in South Africa in all aspects of energy, coal and renewable ­energy,” Reddy said.

Some Indian manufacturers that operate locally include Mahindra and Tata Motors.

Reddy said that even more Indian manufacturers wanted to come to the country. 

Under the tag-line “United by Legacy, Unified for prosperity”, the summit aims to maximise the potential of economic and commercial partnerships between the two countries. 

It is expected that today a memorandum of understanding will be signed between ­InvestSA  and Invest India. 

Reddy said the relationship between the countries should be closer.

“Our countries are tied ­together, and it is very important that more business is done between the two nations.

“During the apartheid state, India supported us greatly.” 

Reddy said another area that South Africa could benefit from was tourism. 

“A lot of Indians come to South Africa to see the Gandhi museum in Inanda.

“We believe a greater effort could be made to improve and
encourage tourism,” he said. 

Reddy said the two Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) countries should look into further collaboration in the education sector. 

“Despite its size, India has managed to be a leader in ­education.We can learn a lot from them on how to improve our education system,” Reddy
said.
The Mercury