Durban - Living with disabilities did not hamper the academic prowess of three University of KwaZulu-Natal Education students who graduated this week.
Dr Anita Hiralaal, an accounting lecturer at the university, obtained her PhD in Education despite having suffered a stroke. 

The stroke affected her eyesight and co-ordination and was yet another major blow after her husband died in 2011. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Because of the stroke, I spent some time in hospital as I needed intense treatment. My sabbatical leave was spent getting occupational therapy, physiotherapy and psychological counselling because the stroke left me with severe depression. 

“In this time, I still had to manage my late husband’s business and my household,” said Hiralaal. 

But despite the challenges and having so much on her plate, she worked hard and put a lot of time and effort into her research. 

“It was a very difficult time in my life, nevertheless I had to be brave and I realised that I had an inner strength that kept me optimistic and courageous,” she said. 

Courage, as well as perseverance and determination, are what led Ntombizodwa Chiya to obtain her honours degree in education. 

Chiya, who was born blind like her father and other family members, said she was inspired by her sighted sister’s graduation. “Most blind people don’t consider themselves on the same level as able-bodied people. This thinking must stop,” said Chiya. 

“We’re capable of so much, our loss of sight should not stop us from achieving our dreams. Blind people should educate themselves, and not see themselves as burdens.” 

Chiya hopes to one day use the knowledge she gained from her Honours research and personal experiences to establish an NGO that advocates for blind people and helps raise awareness around disability issues and their impact on the psyches of the disabled.

Unlike Chiya, Mbali Sithole was not born with a disability. 

She lost her hearing and suffered paralysis of one side of her body during her undergraduate studies. 

“My friend persuaded me to study at UKZN. I didn’t even believe him or even know that universities take deaf students. Being at UKZN has changed my life, and this is where I began to pursue my goals. 

“The university has restored what I lost through my disability.”

Sithole attributed her success in obtaining her Bachelor of Education degree to prayer, hard work and not comparing herself to anyone. 

“I encourage students not to let their disabilities stop them from achieving their goals. Believe in yourself, everything is possible,” she said. 
Mercury Reporter