Durban - The Hawks have confirmed that a body, found at the Tugela River in February, is that of missing UK botanist, Rodney Saunders. He and his wife, Rachel, went missing on February whilst they were in Kwazulu-Natal on a work assignment.
Hawks spokesperson, Captain Lloyd Ramovha, said the first set of forensic results were released on Wednesday. Saunders's body was found on February 17, by a local fisherman. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"Four suspects appeared in the Verulam Magistrate's Court on Wednesday. The Hawks’ intensive investigation led to the arrest of a couple; Sayfydeen Del Vecchio and Fatima Patel 38 and 27 respectively on February 16, following a raid at their dwelling. The pair has been in custody ever since they were arrested and they have appeared in court a few times," he said. 
Themba Xulu a 19-year-old teenager was arrested late in February after he was also linked to the couple’s disappearance when he was found in possession of both the victims’ cell phones. His bail application has since been denied. Further investigations led to the arrest of a Malawian national, Ahmad Mussa (36), on March 22, He is the fourth accused in this case. 
The matter was adjourned until April 25 and 26  for a formal bail application for Patel and Del Vecchio respectively who previously abandoned their bail bid.
The group face charges of kidnapping, robbery with aggravating circumstances two counts of murder, possession of stolen property. Additionally Del Vecchio who originates from neighbouring Mozambique and Patel face charges of arson and possession of a terror group flag.

During their court appearance, Xulu has been separated from his co-accused as the charges that he faces are of a less serious nature. He is due back in court on Thursday. He is believed to be negotiating with the State. 

Ramovha said a dedicated team remain on the ground for the search of Rachel. 
"The focus includes the mortuaries where unidentified bodies found within the search period are currently being subjected to Forensic analysis and DNA tests. Further results are awaited in this regard," he said. 
The Mercury