Durban - After an exciting end to another season of test cricket, a number of future South African cricketers will be celebrating more than just the Proteas’ win after a generous donation from Willowton Group’s Sunfoil Education Trust (SET).

For every six hit during the Sunfoil Test series, Willowton Group donated R2 000 towards the SET, with another R1 000 for each four and R2 500 for every wicket taken. The total amount raised during the South Africa vs Australia test series brings the total to R980 000 brought into the SET during the past three Sunfoil Test series. This will be used to fund bursaries for young cricketers residing in disadvantaged communities, empowering them with educational opportunities and dedicated sports’ coaching.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is such a rewarding experience knowing that every four and six that cricket-lovers celebrate, every wicket taken, gets another child one step closer to the chance at a better life,” said Shoaib Moosa, Chief Commercial Officer for Willowton Group.
“Since the establishment of this Trust in 1995, 21 talented cricketers have been placed at some of South Africa’s leading schools, better positioning them for academic and sporting greatness. We look forward to awarding more bursaries to young cricketers, developing a strong sporting foundation that will benefit local communities and our future Proteas’ squad," he said.  

Candidates considered for this illustrious bursary programme must have completed the Sunfoil Township Cricket development programme. Established in 2007, this dedicated coaching programme improves cricketing skills of youngsters in disadvantaged communities. The best cricketers are selected for the development squads for further skills’ enhancement with the top players eligible for the SET bursary scheme.

These sought-after bursaries provide full academic tuition, funding uniforms and boarding with the added benefit of high-level sports’ coaching throughout the school year. Bursary recipients have been placed at several schools countrywide, including Glenwood School in Durban, Somerset College in Cape Town, Hudson Park High in East London, Cornwall Hill College in Gauteng, Louis Botha Technical High School in Bloemfontein, Upington High and Kimberley Boys High.

"The Sunfoil Education Trust is truly a life-changing initiative which is driving our goal of improving transformation in cricket from grassroots’ level,” explained CSA Acting Chief Executive Officer, Thabang Moroe. “We are always incredibly proud to be a part of this Trust which has a proven track record for success.”

He said that, in addition to the solid sports’ grounding these candidates received, they were empowered with academic and social support structures that were developed to see them succeed.

“It is difficult not to be moved by the stories these bursary recipients have to share. The hardships they have had to endure and the incredible self-discipline and commitment they have to practice to get to where they are. I am really looking forward to welcoming more future Proteas through the programme.”
The Mercury