Durban - The DA in Cape Town has launched a new bid to get rid of mayor Patricia de Lille, fresh from an elective conference where a policy to help oust her was adopted.
On Monday the party’s caucus approached its federal executive for  permission to table a motion of no confidence against her in the caucus.

This comes as the party’s top brass deal with representations by De Lille on why she attended a memorial service for ANC veteran Winnie Madikizela-Mandela organised by the EFF. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In February, De Lille survived a motion of no confidence sponsored by her party after she was backed by opposition party members.

DA deputy caucus leader in the Cape Town Council JP Smith said the majority of the DA councillors have voted in favour of approaching the party’s federal executive for a second motion against her.  

“This time it would be the vote inside the DA caucus, where the DA has freedom to choose its own leader. This time the DA will choose its own leader in the council,” Smith said.

He said although DA councillors were still divided on whether mayor De Lille should be recalled or not, “there is an overwhelming majority which decided to proceed with the process to ask for the federal executive for permission for a second vote of no confidence inside the caucus”.

He said the caucus was waiting for the federal executive to respond to the request.

He rejected claims that firing De Lille could cost the DA coloured votes.

“After we had the first motion of no confidence we had several by-elections in the Western Cape and elsewhere where we increased support.

“People constrained the DA around the personality of the mayor, and I think the voters are beyond that, and care about service delivery,” he said.

Remove

The recent DA conference adopted a policy that will allow the party to recall its leaders from office which many said had been introduced to allow the party to remove De Lille as mayor.

She is currently being hauled before a disciplinary hearing by the DA  following allegations of unduly influencing the appointment of staff in the city, failure to exercise her duties in terms of certain legislation and abuse of power.

The so-called De Lille clause that was adopted reads: “If the president, a premier, a mayor, or any other public represen-
tative elected or appointed to any executive position in a DA government, has lost 
confidence of his or her 
caucus, the federal executive may, after giving him or her the opportunity to make representations to it, resolve to require him or her to resign from his or her office within 48 hours.”

De Lille last night said the latest moves confirmed that the “De Lille clause” was designed to remove her. 

“I have heard on the news about the request they are putting before the party’s Federal Executive. 

“I have not been informed officially. I will wait and see. These people are hell-bent on smearing my name and I am hell-bent on clearing my name,” she said.
The Mercury