Failure to follow customs to the letter when marrying his partner has cost a Soweto man the right to bury her.
Leonard Khosa was interdicted by the High Court in Johannesburg on Wednesday from burying Ayanda Zulu, for whom he completed paying lobolo in 2014. 

Judge Lebogang Modiba ruled that Zulu should be buried by her 78-year-old mother, Lindi Zulu, in KwaZulu-Natal.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Modiba delivered her judgment following an urgent application lodged by Zulu. 

“The funeral shall be conducted in Osizweni, Newcastle, by the applicant,” said Judge Modiba. “The respondents are directed to hand over the body of the deceased within one hour.”

Judge Modiba said police should confiscate the body if Khosa refused to release it. 

Ayanda, a Joburg metro police inspector, was gunned down outside the home she shared with Khosa in Palm Springs three weeks ago. 

Interment arrangements came to a halt two weeks ago as a feud broke out between the families.

Ayanda’s mother lodged the urgent action against Khosa, arguing he could not bury her child because she was not yet his wife by customary law.

The family maintains that though Khosa paid R25000 as lobolo in 2014, he had not performed the penultimate stage of the lobolo process. Modiba heard that this is a “handover” ceremony. 

Ayanda’s family said in Zulu custom, this ceremony confirmed the transfer of a bride to her new family.

“In this matter there was no handover whatsoever,” advocate Siphiwe Mpetwane 
argued for the mother.

“There was no conclusion of the customary marriage. The Zulu family never waived their right (to a handover).

“If there’s no handover, the case law (based on a previous court ruling) tells us there’s no conclusion of the customary marriage.”

Zulu told the court on Monday: “The crucial part of our culture did not take place. We were supposed to slaughter a cow, and they were supposed to do the same (to cement the marriage).”

Advocate Henny Mnisi, 
arguing for Khosa, told the court yesterday that his client had believed the customary marriage process was concluded when the Zulu family allowed him and his uncles to leave with Ayanda following a celebration held in her home in Osizweni.

Mnisi said according to Khosa’s culture, Tsonga, there was no additional step after lobolo payment was completed and celebrations were held. 

He said Khosa “was astonished” when told while preparing for Ayanda’s burial that she was actually never his wife, just a cohabiting girlfriend. 

“These (isiZulu) customs were never communicated to my client,” said Mnisi.

He  further argued, noting that this was an intercultural marriage, “one can’t expect every person from every culture to be vested with Zulu culture”.
The Mercury