Durban - The public were out in their numbers enjoying the day on Durban’s Golden Mile yesterday, despite the closure of several beaches for sand pumping.
North Beach was a hive of activity, with many stopping to watch the tons of sand being pumped on to the shore. 

The municipality wasted no time starting the work, after closing parts of North, Dairy, Country Club and Battery beaches on Friday. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Bathing is prohibited at parts of these beaches until the operation - which is expected to take four weeks - is complete. 

eThekwini Municipality’s engineering unit’s Coastal, Stormwater and Catchment Management Department deputy head, Randeer Kasserchun, said sand from the south of the harbour was being dredged and transferred to Durban’s central beaches through pumping operations.

This comes after severe soil erosion left the promenade in a sorry state, and a part of the North Beach lifeguards’ clubhouse hanging precariously in the air. 

In March, The Mercury reported that the municipality said an emergency plan would be put in place to replenish the sand on Durban’s rapidly eroding central beaches.

At the time, the city was accused of having an inefficient sand pumping system, which was leading to the eroding of the beaches.

Kasserchun said: “If sand is not pumped on to the identified beaches, they may have to be closed for bathing, as the safety of bathers will be at risk.”

Replenishment at these ­locations was being ­undertaken through an offshore system. 

Last month, municipality spokesperson Tozi Mthethwa told The Mercury that Transnet had recommended a temporary offshore pipeline, with the dredger discharging sand directly on to the beaches.

The city said Transnet would not charge the municipality for the sand or for the use of the dredger, which it shares with other cities, such as Richards Bay and East ­London. 

As such, this emergency sand replenishment process - a joint operation between the City and Transnet - has been approved by the KwaZulu-­Natal Department of Eco­nomic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs.

Samples will be taken to test for water and sand quality. 

The municipality urged beach-goers to be patient during the process, and to comply with the temporary restrictions. 
The Mercury