Durban - The death of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has left the country reeling as one of the icons of the Struggle against the absurdity of the apartheid regime has shuffled off this mortal coil. In Durban this week, Nadia Meer, the niece of Fatima Meer shared with Kuben Chetty her recollections of her aunt’s and Madikizela-Mandela’s friendship
On Monday afternoon the country was shocked to learn the news that  Madikizela-Mandela had died after a long illness. Shocked because, despite her health issues, Madikizela-Mandela still retained her indomitable spirit and flawless beauty. 

Nadia Meer was a child when she first met Madikizela-Mandela, who had been banished to Brandfort in the Free State, hundreds of kilometres from her Soweto home.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nadia’s father Dr Farouk Meer (Fatima Meer’s youngest brother) was one of the seven leading members of the Natal Indian Congress. The family had been asked by Fatima to visit Madikizela-Mandela and offer her support in her time of need. 

“My aunt and Auntie Winnie knew each other from before they were married to Nelson Mandela and Ismail Meer.

“They had the deepest of connections because they were married to lawyers who were involved in the Struggle.

“Our family got involved with the Mandelas because of the friendship between my aunt and Auntie Winnie.”

Nadia and her aunt lived within walking distance of each other in Sydenham, a Durban suburb. 

Fatima Meer’s Burnwood Road home also played host to the Mandela’s when Nelson was released from prison and before he became president.

Nadia said her aunt was 
aggrieved that Madikizela-Mandela was not recognised for the leadership role she 
had played during the height of apartheid.

“People related to her as the wife of Nelson Mandela rather than a leader in her own right. She and Mandela differed on their approach to politics -  auntie Winnie was opposed to Mandela accepting the Nobel Peace Prize because he was accepting it with FW de Klerk.”

Nadia said more should have been done while Madikizela-Mandela was alive to recognise the crucial role she played during apartheid.

“He (Nelson Mandela) was in jail and she bore the brunt of the apartheid regime.”

Madikizela-Mandela was tormented by the apartheid police who used her to get to her husband, but also to punish her for inspiring young activists. In 1969, she spent 18 months in solitary confinement. 

“Auntie Winnie was sidelined because she held different views. Mandela consulted a lot, and did not make decisions on his own as he was trying to appease everyone. 

“Winnie was different.”

Fatima Meer also tried to help the Mandela’s patch up their marriage before they eventually divorced.

“She was like a marriage counsellor and one of the very few people who could tell Madiba off.”

Nadia believes the title “mother of the nation” bestowed on  Madikizela-Mandela is appropriate.

“I don’t think anyone else deserves that title. She and my aunt were women of that era who defied oppression and were strong despite all the patriarchal views of how they should be seen.

“When I think of them and what they achieved I feel sad to see the state of the ANC Women’s League.”

The last time Nadia saw her aunt and Madikizela-Mandela together was at the World Social Forum in Mumbai in 2004.

“I stayed in touch with Aunt Winnie when I could. I run a project that assists child activists in Palestine and we were due to visit her in August last year, but then she fell ill. 

“One of the activists we brought to the country was Ahed Tamimi (a 16-year-old who was arrested by the Israeli army last year).

“She was keen to get involved with young activists and felt it was critical that we worked on helping in this type of activism.”

Nadia believes that people must try to understand what it was like for Madikizela-Mandela to raise a young family, have her husband in prison, and be relied upon to continue the struggle against apartheid.

“She was thrust into the forefront of apartheid and had to adapt.”

In 2007, Nadia was commissioned by Fatima Meer to design an Africadi inspired shawl and bead work for Madikizela-Mandela’s 70th birthday. 

Nadia said the Fatima and Winnie’s yard at Constitution Hill Women’s jail was 
a wonderful tribute to the 
two women who considered each other as sisters in the Struggle.



 Chetty is the KZN Political Editor
The Mercury