After 21 years of the Comrades Marathon down runs finishing at Kingsmead Cricket Stadium, this year’s race will see a major change with the race finishing at Moses Mabhida stadium.
But not everyone seems  happy with the change.

While the Comrades Marathon says it has received positive responses , it has also received one objection from a member of an athletics club.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The member and a club chairperson, who spoke to The Mercury, raised concerns about some of the changes, including the “restrictions” that will be imposed at the venue.

One of the concerns is that supporters from athletics clubs will be too removed from the action at the finish line as clubs will not be allowed to erect tents inside the stadium.

The Comrades Marathon Association (CMA) said this year clubs would only be able to erect tents at People’s Park, from where it will be impossible to directly see runners cross the finish line. 

However, the CMA  said this was in keeping with stadium regulations.  It also pointed out that while previously at both Kingsmead and the Oval stadiums there were only a limited number of tent sites, which were sold on a first come first served basis, at People’s Park Tent Village they offered a “largely unlimited number of club tent sites”.

The move to use Moses Mabhida stadium comes after the finish venue for the up run was relocated from the Oval cricket stadium to the Scottsville racecourse last year.

CMA chairperson Cheryl Winn said the main motivation behind changing the finish venue was to ensure safety in line with the regulations of the Safety at Sports & Recreation Events Act of 2010.

“Over the past few years it had become increasingly apparent that with roughly 20000 participants we had either reached, or possibly even exceeded, the ceiling of the number of entries that we could safely and efficiently accommodate at both our up and down run finish venues,” she said.

Cost was also a consideration, albeit a lesser one, Winn added, as the facilities at Moses Mabhida stadium would negate many of the logistical expenses the organisers usually incurred. 

“We anticipate that the move to Moses Mabhida stadium will enable us to significantly enhance both our finish processing facilities and our entertainment appeal to spectators.”

Gwenda Watts, a member of Savages Athletic Club who has been involved as a seconder and supporter of 19 races, expressed unhappiness at the new plan.

She said the race was known for the camaraderie between runners and supporters, and the new arrangement was going to erase that.

Watts will be at this year’s race to support her daughter who is running the race, and is disappointed that she will not be close enough to the action, as has been the case before.

Winn said the objection from Watts was the only objection they had received, adding that she would be responding directly to her.

“The responses we have received through phone calls, letters, social and traditional media have been overwhelmingly positive toward the move,” she said.

Winn said the clubs could opt to purchase an allocated seating area on Level 3 of the stadium. These are being sold in blocks of 50 at R10 per seat. 

Watts also complained about the cost associated with setting up a tent, but Winn said the costs for club tent sites “range from R660 (for grass space only), compared with R550 at Kingsmead two years ago, to R4575 (which includes marquee, tables, chairs, power-point and flatscreen television), which is an entirely new offering.”

Robin Honeysett, the chairperson of the Savages Athletics Club, also raised concerns similar to Watts’s, saying another major issue was that no food would be allowed into the stadium.

Winn said that while food could not be brought into the stadium and must be purchased from licensed vendors, runners would be provided with soup and beverages free of charge upon finishing the event. 

“We are very excited about the move, we think the final few kilometres along Masabalala Yengwa are going to present a spectacular run-in to the finish, and have high hopes that our runners and spectators will continue to embrace the changes,” Winn said.