Durban - Philanthropic funding to South African universities has increased by almost R1-billion in the past four years, making the first time South African donors have contributed more than international sources. 

This is according to the 2017 Annual Survey of Philanthropy in Higher Education (ASPIHE), which found that South African trusts, foundations, corporations and individuals are donating more to local universities than ever before. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The survey, is a project of Inyathelo: the South African Institute for Advancement, with sponsorship by the US-based Kresge Foundation. 

Of the country’s 26 universities, 12- including the Durban University of Technology, the University of KwaZulu-Natal and the University of Zululand- participated in this fourth annual survey.

Nazli Abrahams, Inyathelo programme director, said the philanthropic income of these universities increased to R1.63-billion in 2016, making it the first time giving by South African donors has exceeded income from international sources. 

South Africans accounted for 90% of all donors and contributed 56% of total funding. International donors contributed 44% of philanthropic income but comprised only 10% of donors. 

The private sector has increased its contributions dramatically from R94 million in 2013 to R235 -million in 2016, while income from local private donors increased very significantly from R72 million to more than R500 million over four years.

ASPIHE researcher Dr Sean Jones said the historical “over-reliance” of the South African higher education sector on international donors and grant-makers has begun to diminish. “There does remain considerable support and goodwill among foreign donor agencies towards higher education institutions in this country.  This suggests mounting recognition across all sectors of the critical need to partner and invest in higher education if it is to survive, and indeed thrive, in the context of the most severe fiscal challenges ever faced by this country’s universities.”
The Mercury