Durban- As self-driving cars get ever closer to widespread reality, Waymo is taking a step into the future by becoming the first company to launch a commercial self-driving taxi service.
The service is due to start this year in the USA city of Phoenix, and will cover an area of 160 square kilometres. The Jaguar I-Pace electric cars (pictured) within this geofenced area will be able to operate without the need for a driver at any time.

“Members of the public will be able to take our cars anywhere in our service area,” said Waymo boss John Krafcik at the New York auto show last week.  “We will be driving everywhere - dense, urban centres, high-speed roads, low-speed roads, suburbs; there’s every driving scenario to be imagined.”ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Waymo, formerly the Google Self-Driving Car Project, has already notched up more than eight million kilometres with its fleet of 600 self-driving cars testing in 25 cities across the US.

The company is going ahead with its taxi service in spite of two fatal collisions involving autonomous cars last month. In the first, an Uber self-driving taxi killed a pedestrian crossing a road in Tempe, Arizona. A few days later a Tesla in Autopilot mode crashed and killed its occupant in Mountain View California; this after a 2016 fatal accident in Florida where a Tesla on Autopilot crashed into a truck.

It’s impossible to know how many lives have been saved so far by autonomous or semi-autonomous cars but these fatal incidents, as rare as they may be, show that there are some technological kinks that need working out before self-driving cars are unleashed into the wider world. Nevertheless, it’s estimated that robotised cars will account for up to a quarter of vehicle sales in 20 years’ time.

Many new cars twirling on today’s motor show stands are being launched with some level of autonomous driving ability, edging closer to an end-game where we can one day let the car ‘take the wheel’. Imagine how less stressful rush-hour commutes would be if a car can guide itself through the gridlock while you sit back and read a book, watch a movie, or take a nap.
The Mercury