Durban - State advocate Dorian Paver elicited gasps from the Durban Regional Court on Tuesday, when he revealed he had been placed under 24-hour-security after receiving death threats for taking on the Glebelands Seven case.
Paver asked magistrate Siphiwe  Hlope to consider “who would benefit” if he was killed before or during the course of the trial. It is understood that the “hit” on Paver had been solicited from a cellphone used inside prison and relayed to police via an informant.

Paver was arguing against bail being granted to Vukani Mcobothi, Eugene Wonderboy Hlophe, Durban Central Detective Bhekukwazi Louis Mdweshu, Ncomekile Mtalala Nstshangase and Mbuyiselwa Mkhize, who are in custody.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Accused number seven, Mondli Thalente Mthethwa, has abandoned his bid for bail because he is standing trial on an unrelated murder charge. 

Khayelihle Mbuthuma also abandoned his bid for bail as he was found guilty of murder on April 3, of a Glebelands Hostel grandmother, under common purpose, and was sentenced to life in prison.

All accused are being charged under common purpose for crimes including murder and attempted murder that took place at the hostel between August 19, 2014 and March 26, 2016.

According to the charge sheet, the men conspired to form a syndicate with the common purpose to kill Glebelands’ residents in order to take control of the hostel and acquire the control of
payments made by hostel dwellers.

Paver told the court he was seeking a swift prosecution and it was up to the magistrate to discern “on the balance of probabilities” if the accused would interfere with witnesses if released on bail.

Advocate Jimmy Howse, acting for Hlophe, Mdweshu and Ntshangase, said his clients would not skip bail as they were entrenched in their communities and had assets and employment to return to.

He also questioned the credibility of the State witnesses as they came from an opposing faction at Glebelands Hostel. 

He said a trend had developed where the prosecution withheld the identities of witnesses, making it impossible to know whom the accused could associate with if they were released on bail. 

He said the inference that the accused would kill witnesses was “patently incorrect”.

Lawyer Peter Mhlongo, for Mcobothi and Mkhize, said it was “common knowledge” that incidents at Glebelands had reached a global audience and that there was pressure to make arrests. 

His clients had found themselves caught up in the need to find culprits, he said.

Mhlongo said in the State’s affidavit it made mention of opposing factions at the hostel, throwing doubt on the credibility of State witnesses.

“There is no case against them. There is no explanation of how they are linked to the crimes committed.”

The case was postponed to April26 for judgment on the bail application. - African News Agency (ANA)