Durban - Having failed in their quest to see the ANC KZN conference postponed until after next year’s general elections, party members are now split over who should contest Sihle Zikalala as provincial chairperson.
ANC secretary general Ace Magashule had after the meeting of the national working committee, which President Cyril Ramaphosa attended in Durban on Monday, announced that the province would hold its conference next month.

The decision was celebrated by Zikalala’s supporters, but those opposed said they had no choice but to accept the situation.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Laurence Dube, who had challenged the legitimacy of Zikalala’s executive in court, said regions in KZN had not agreed who to nominate for chairperson. Some preferred former economic development MEC Mike Mabuyakhulu; others favoured SACP provincial chairperson James Nxumalo.

“The regions have nominated a mixed kind of a thing. We have to sit down and consolidate our nomination and come up with one name,” he said.

“James is known and Mabuyakhulu is known, but we have to chose one name.”

Dube said the camp was 
yet to come up with other names for the top five.

Nxumalo is a former eThekwini Municipal mayor, and Mabuyakhulu served as convener of the outgoing provincial interim committee, with Zikalala as the co-ordinator. Nxumalo and Mabuyakhulu are both aligned to 
the Ramaphosa faction in KZN.

The faction was left with no obvious favourite candidate after Senzo Mchunu was elected in December to serve in the national executive committee.  

Dube said Zikalala’s opponents were unhappy with the conference being scheduled for next month because conditions that had given rise to their initial unhappiness, such as gatekeeping 
at branch general meetings, persisted .

“But the decision does not go well down my throat, as we know that there is no justice in this whole thing. 

“These people who want the conference to sit are the very same people who are denying our people access to processes of the ANC,” he said.

Dube said he had told Deputy President David Mabuza 
on Sunday, during the Abaqulusi region meeting in Vryheid, that people who 
were calling for the conference to sit were those who were side-lining their opponents 
in order to secure a win.

Moses Mabhida region chairperson Musawenkosi Mchunu said his camp in the region had not nominated anyone because they had not accepted that the conference would be held next month.

“We will wait for the NEC to announce the final decision next week before we make up our minds. Nominating candidates is currently not on our agenda,” said Mchunu.

Mandla Shange, the provincial spokesperson for the pro-Zikalala ANC Youth League, said its branches in the various regions had nominated 
Zikalala’s top five to retain their positions.
The Mercury