Durban - Close associates of former prison boss Russel Ngubo say his recent return to jail may be a “political hit” meant to make him live in fear.
He was released on parole last year after serving 12 years of his 25-year prison term after being convicted in 2005 for the murder of IFP members in Impendle in the 1990s.

However, it was reported this week that Correctional Services officials had been looking for Ngubo as it was alleged that he had broken stringent parole conditions by travelling out of the province.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Ngubo handed himself over on Wednesday, in terms of an agreement reached between his attorney and Correctional Services. 

He is at Westville prison and a decision on whether his parole should be revoked still has to be made.

Sources close to Ngubo said the allegations of parole violations had been brought to make him fear for his safety.

They said that since his release, Ngubo had noticed things that had made him uncomfortable.

“And when he was released from prison, he was given a car and security. He thought the car was paid for by the ANC but he recently discovered it was rented for him by a municipality. 

“He questioned that because there was no legitimate reason a ­municipality would be renting a car (for him).”

The source said Ngubo had attended an ANC branch meeting in Impendle and had raised concerns about the violation of the partys’ constitution in his branches.

Another issue was that during branch meetings, there were members distributing ANC T-shirts with former president Jacob Zuma’s face even though the party had a new president, said the source.

“Even the way the allegations of parole violation were handled against him raises concerns. Normally, if you are accused of parole violations, you are given a verbal then a written warning. That never happened.

“It’s clear he’s a marked man,” said the source.

Correctional Services provincial regional commissioner Mnikelwa Nxele confirmed that Ngubo had handed himself in.

Approached for comment on the allegations, ANC Moses Mabhida regional secretary Mzi Zuma said it would not be drawn into the matter, which “is being dealt with by Correctional Services”.
The Mercury