An 8-year-old girl, Asifa, was kidnapped, drugged and raped in a Hindu temple in Kathua, Kashmir, for a week and then brutally killed by a group of men.
Gang rapes are not unusual in India. In 2012, the brutality of a gang rape against a graphic designer on a bus in the capital city, New Delhi, unleashed one of the biggest protests in the country against sexual violence. 

Not only was the rape against the 8-year-old, belonging to the nomadic Muslim community of Kashmir, more heinous, but it was different from similar “incidents”, as Prime Minister Narendra Modi - after weeks of silence - chose to describe the ghoulish act.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This horrific rape in Kathua triggered international outrage with even the Secretary-General of the UN, Antonio Guterres, demanding punishment for those responsible. 

Modi, who is likely to face protests during his coming foreign travels, promised justice to India’s daughters, but his wishy-washy construct of the “incident” did not satisfy many.

The rape of this child was different.  Not only was it was premeditated - it was planned for weeks - but it was also perpetrated and masterminded by those who had links with the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party who are keen to drive the Muslim nomads from their traditional grazing grounds. 

They were confident that they would succeed in their diabolical enterprise because they had a favourable administration in their city and the state. 

Although this rape and murder took place in January, the wheels of the probe into it moved slowly. If it hadn’t been for the doggedness and persistence of a couple of police officials in the states of Jammu and Kashmir, the matter would have been passed off as an unexplained murder. 

When the police filed the charge sheet in the case, India not just woke up to knowledge of the sick minds of the rapists, but also to those who agitated in their favour. 

Lawyers of Jammu bar council were at the forefront of the demonstration to support the rapists. Two state ministers of the BJP, which is a partner in the state government, led the protest against the charge sheet. 

The ministers were forced to resign from the government after the issue caused national outrage and embarrassed the Modi government. 

One of them candidly admitted that they took part in the protest only after being instructed to do so by their party leadership.

The moot question is: How could anyone support the perpetrators after chilling details of her captivity, rape and murder were revealed? She was kidnapped when she was out grazing her horses. She was first raped by a juvenile, who was co-opted into this conspiracy by his mastermind uncle. Later, she was drugged and kept in the sanctum of the temple under a plastic sheet and was repeatedly raped by all kinds of people - allegedly including a serving police man.

 Later, she was killed - her head crushed by a rock. Bizarrely, the alleged rapists and murderers found extraordinary support in a society that seems split right at the centre. 

Nursing a grievance against the minority community because of a deliberate misreading of history and the policies of previous secular governments, the support for 
violence is bordering on irrationality. 

The majority zealots justify every act of violence as follows: “What about an incident that took place in history against them?” 

This “whataboutery” has many vocal and strong proponents among those who are supporters of the 
Indian prime minister. They ridicule the protests against sexual violence by saying that  the government was silent when a similar act took place against the Hindus of Kashmir. A candle-lit march by Congress President Rahul Gandhi, to Delhi’s India Gate, was criticised by BJP leaders and their social media activists by claiming that the opposition leader was trying to politicise a criminal act.

This criticism of the anti-gender violence  proved to be inadequate as reports began to occupy the headlines about another alleged rape by a BJP legislator in the state of Uttar Pradesh. 

This rape was not directed at the minority community, but was brought to the fore by the wanton disregard the party members had for the rule of law. No police report was filed against the offending legislator months after the crime had been committed, despite the victim meeting the Chief Minister of the State, Yogi Adityanath, and petitioning the president of India. 

Worse, the brother of the legislator beat the alleged rape victim’s father to death. In a video recording of the deceased’s, he had claimed that he was beaten so brutally in front of ploice officers, who did nothing. Shockingly, the chief of the state police force addressed the accused rapist as “the honourable” at a press briefing. The legislator would have continued to roam around freely had the state high court not ordered the police to arrest the legislator immediately.

These recent incidents of violence - and the protection that the accused have got from the police and the government - have sullied Modi’s image, who had launched a programme against female infanticide called “Beti bachao, beti padhao” (protect your daughter and teach your daughter). Now his critics are claiming he had presciently cautioned his countrymen to protect their daughters from harm.

In some of the localities of northern India, residents have begun to put public notices outside their colonies asking BJP politicians not to visit them because “women also reside here”.

A wave of protests have swept the country in an effort to highlight the anti-women stance of the ruling party and its ideological mother ship, Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSS), which wants women to only produce babies and work in the kitchen. 

Much of the violence against women gets legitimacy because of this attitude.

As the country heads to national elections in 2019 - if it is not brought forward -  the issue of women’s and girls’ safety could have the same impact as it had in 2014 after the famous bus gang rape case, when the then ruling party Congress lost the election. 



*  Kapoor is an Independent Media correspondent based in Delhi