Durban - ANC KwaZulu-Natal interim committee co-ordinator Sihle Zikalala dismissed media reports that supporters of former president Jacob Zuma were holding secret talks to discredit President Cyril Ramaphosa and eventually remove him from the helm.
Zikalala dismissed a Sunday newspaper report as a “propaganda campaign” to sow division in the already fractured governing party.

“Many people would want to launch an offensive against the ANC using propaganda and divisive methods to undermine cohesion in the ANC. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is important for members of the ANC to close ranks and rise to the occasion and be able to face the opposition and win support of the masses,’’ Zikalala told the SABC.

“These are just rumours I haven’t heard of anyone in KwaZulu-Natal proposing to vote for anyone else except consolidating unity and to ensure support for the ANC come the 2019 general elections.’’

The Sunday paper reported that a new political party had been formed by Zuma’s close ally Caesar Nongqunga, with Zuma’s blessing. Nongqunga is president of the Twelve Apostles Church in Christ. 

Leaders of the church reportedly held a meeting at uMgababa, where a letter written to the ANC informing it of the decision to launch the new party, the African Transformation Congress, was read out. Several meetings had been held where a plan to undermine Ramaphosa had been hatched, the newspaper said.

“The plan includes ensuring that Zuma’s close ally Sihle Zikalala is re-elected party chairman when the province elects new leaders. 

“The Zikalala-led executive would then call for an early ANC national general council meeting, which would be converted to a national elective conference to remove Ramaphosa,’’ the report stated.

Ramaphosa would be accused of failing to implement party resolutions adopted at its 2017 Nasrec conference, including expropriation of land without compensation. 

ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule was reportedly aware of the plan. Should the plan fail, the Zuma backers would encourage the province not to vote ANC nationally. - African News Agency (ANA)