Durban- The Inspector-General of Intelligence, Setlhomamaru Dintwe, will next week ask the Gauteng High Court, Pretoria, for an urgent interdict ­preventing State Security Agency (SSA) director-general Arthur Fraser from revoking his security clearance and interfering in his 
duties.
In papers filed at court, Dintwe claimed Fraser was trying to block an investigation into serious allegations against him. 

He also claimed that Fraser was threatening him.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Fraser, who has been named as a respondent in the court papers, has yet to file his answering affidavit.

Dintwe will on Tuesday ask that Fraser be interdicted from giving effect to his decision to revoke his security clearance. 

He will also ask for an urgent order declaring that he (Dintwe) be permitted to carry out all powers, obligations and responsibilities ­attached to his office. 

Dintwe wants the court to order Fraser to co-operate with the current investigations lodged with his office.

Fraser was implicated in unlawful conduct in Jacques Pauw’s book The President’s Keepers. 

It was claimed that Fraser, while he was the director-general of the National Intelligence Agency from 2007 to 2009, mismanaged state security funds - a claim that Fraser has denied.

On Wednesday, Pauw called for the suspension of Fraser and alleged that he was implicated in the ­“wastage of a billion rand”.

The claims made in Pauw’s book were reported by the DA to Dintwe’s office for investigation.

Dintwe said in an affidavit that he had no choice but to urgently ­approach the court for protection. 

“This is due to the extraordinary nature of the decision taken by the director-general - to prevent me from gaining access to my office and executing my responsibilities.”

Dintwe said Fraser was the subject of an investigation “of an extremely serious nature” which could be both damaging to the standing of the intelligence services and the public interest.

He said the allegations against Fraser include that he fraudulently copied the signature of then 
minister for intelligence services Ronnie Kasrils when “establishing an illegal intelligence programme known as the Principal Agent Network”.

He also alleged that Fraser ­improperly awarded tenders and contracts to people associated with his family and other individuals.

Threatening

According to Dintwe, Fraser, in November last year, addressed a threatening letter to him in which he said he was aware that he (Dintwe) was in possession of certain classified information submitted to his office by the DA.

Dintwe said that in a desperate attempt to stop the investigation against him, Fraser had tried to revoke his security clearance.

“He claims that my security clearance is being revoked because I am a threat to security. The reason why it is alleged that I am a threat to security is because I am supposedly in possession of classified information,” Dintwe stated.

“By definition my role is to be in possession of classified information The only purpose for revoking my clearance is to prevent me from conducting an investigation against him. This is misuse of public power and state resources to achieve improper ends.”

Other respondents in the case are the ministers of state security and finance, the joint standing committee on intelligence and President Cyril Ramaphosa, who have yet to file their answering affidavits.

State Security Agency spokesperson Brian Dube said the agency had noted the application. 

“We are going through those court papers to understand the 
issues, and then we will respond 
appropriately,” he said.

Calls for disciplinary action to be taken against Fraser grew yesterday. 

The Right2Know Campaign said Fraser should not be left to continue being in charge of the SSA.

“The revelation that Fraser has attempted to shut down the inspector-general’s investigations of these allegations makes his removal all the more urgent,” Right2Know said.

Gareth Newham, a researcher at the Institute for Security Studies, said given the prima facie evidence of wrongdoing, Fraser should be suspended as a matter of urgency to allow for a thorough and unhindered investigation. 

Newham said the InspectorGeneral was a constitutionally ­mandated structure to oversee the country’s intelligence structures, and any attempt to interfere with its work was criminal. 

“It is an extremely serious crime,” he said.

Pauw said there were two damning reports into Fraser’s abortive Principal Agent Network project which were leaked to him. 

“The reports are a complete indictment of Fraser and his cronies, and raises the question of how Jacob Zuma could have appointed Fraser as SSA D-G in August 2016,” Pauw said.
The Mercury