Durban - The parliamentary inquiry into former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane will confine itself to issues related to his former national department.
This emerged on Wednesday when the portfolio committee on mineral resources was briefed on the terms of reference for the inquiry.

The ANC’s Mandla Mandela raised the matter after it emerged the inquiry will be confined to governance failures and maladministration in the department and sale of Glencore assets.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I don’t want us, down the line, to find there are other associated things. There are issues of the Vrede dairy project, which the committee felt fell outside our mandate,” he said.

Zwane was MEC in the Free State at the start of the project, that is linked to the Guptas and alleged to have fleeced the government of millions.

Parliamentary legal adviser Fatima Ebrahim said their job was to confine themselves to issues related to the department.

“There are other committees in Parliament that will deal with other issues ,” she said.

Zwane has been reported for flying on an “official trip” with the Guptas to Switzerland to facilitate the sale of the Optimum mine from Glencore to Tegeta Exploration and Resources, owned by the Guptas and former president Jacob Zuma’ son Duduzane .

Ebrahim said the inquiry would probe alleged governance failure and maladministration in the department.

Central to the inquiry will be Zwane and the department’s role in the sale of Glencore assets and alleged non-compliance with the Public Finance Management Act, resulting in fruitless and wasteful expenditure in travel arrangements made for the former minister.

The inquiry will also cover Zwane’s breach of the conflict of interest policy and the handling of the mining rehabilitation funds by the department.

Ebrahim also said identified witnesses would be subpoenaed to testify when the inquiry got under way, as well as any other persons.

However, she said witnesses would be allowed to be accompanied by legal representatives.

“But such legal representatives shall not answer questions on behalf of witnesses. This is not a court of law,” Ebrahim said.
The Mercury