Durban - Whistle-blowers may soon be able to make protected disclosures to nearly three dozen state institutions, officials and watchdogs, including complaints about irregular or improper conduct by the judiciary, prosecutors, police officers and even MPs.
The Department of Justice wants to extend the protection of whistle-blowers to include all chapter nine institutions and government watchdogs such as the Financial Intelligence Centre for money laundering activities and financing of 
terrorism, Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng, the Judicial Service and Magistrates Commissions on any alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety by a judge or a magistrate.

The move follows the SA Law Reform Commission’s ­recommendation that pro­tected disclosures should be allowed to be made to additional state institutions and watchdogs.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Cosatu proposed that the Protected Disclosures Act be extended and the list of people or bodies to whom disclosures could be made be revisited.

“In the said report, the commission recommended that in addition to the proposals contained in the discussion paper and the proposals received from respondents, the department should give consideration to the inclusion of persons or bodies to whom disclosures may be made in terms of other legislation,” said the department. 

Protected disclosures range from criminal offences to unfair discrimination, endangering of the health or safety of individuals, damage to the environment, and failure to comply with legal ­obligations to a miscarriage of justice.

They could initially only be reported to the offices of the public protector and the ­auditor-general, until the list was ­extended last year.

In July, former president Jacob Zuma extended the list to include the SA Human Rights Commission, the Commission for Gender Equality, the CRL Commission and the Public Service Commission.

The department now seeks to add an additional 27 state institutions and watchdogs, including the Special Investigative Unit, SA Revenue Service, Independent Police Investigative Directorate, Electoral Commission, National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete and National Council of Provinces chairperson Thandi Modise, among others.

Lobby group Corruption Watch has called for the establishment of a special fund to support whistle-blowers’ legal costs.

Interested parties have until May 21 to comment on the proposed new regulations.
The Mercury