NASHVILLE - Police hunting for a
gunman who fled naked after killing four people at a Nashville
Waffle House searched public schools through the night to make
sure they would be safe when they reopen on Monday.
All Metropolitan Nashville public schools were searched and
will be checked again before school opens, officials said on the
department's Facebook page. Extra security will be in place at
school bus stops. Schools will be on "lock-out," barring all
visitors.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"Metro Nashville Public Schools Parents always have the
final decision on whether to send their child to school," the
statement said.
Police identified the victims. Slain outside the restaurant
in Nashville's Antioch neighborhood shortly before 3:30 a.m.
Sunday were Waffle House cook Taurean C. Sanderlin, 29, and
patron Joe R. Perez, 20, police said. Inside, the shooter killed
patrons DeEbony Groves, 21, and Akilah Dasilva, 23.
"Please say a prayer for my family for today is the hardest
day of my life. Me, my husband and sons are broken right now
with this loss. Our lives are shattered," Perez's mother Trisha
Perez posted on Facebook.
Dasilva's mother Shaundelle Brooks told CBS News affiliate
WTVF her son was a student at Middle Tennessee State University
pursuing music engineering: "He meant the world to us. He was
humble, kind, compassionate, outgoing and very creative."
Groves was a Belmont University senior who studied social
work and was described by her high school basketball coach Kim
Kendrick on CBS News affiliate WTVF as a tenacious player.
Two wounded patrons, Shanita Waggoner, 21, and Sharita
Henderson, 24, were being treated at Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, both listed in stable condition early on Monday.
Others were cut by shattered glass.
One diner, James Shaw Jr., 29, was grazed by a bullet as he
hid near a restroom before he wrestled the AR-15 rifle from the
gunman, police said. Police credited his action with saving
lives. At a news conference, Shaw said he was no hero, adding:
"I just wanted to live."
Metropolitan Nashville Police Field Captain Daniel Newbern
said the suspected shooter, Travis Reinking, 29, originally from
Tazewell County, Illinois, faces multiple murder charges. Police
believe he is still armed with a pistol.
Police disclosed no known motive for the attack by Reinking,
who was naked except for a green jacket when he got out of his
pickup truck and started shooting.
As the shooter ran off, he discarded the jacket, which
contained two additional ammunition magazines for the AR-15,
according to police.