Durban - KwaZulu-Natal Police acting provincial commissioner, Major General Bheki Langa, has strongly condemned the brutal attacks at two taverns on the KZN south coast that left four people dead. The incidents took place within minutes of each other on Monday evening. 
It is alleged that two men, wearing balaclavas and armed with a firearm and knife, entered a local tavern at 9pm in Lamont, Margate and ordered patrons, at gunpoint, to lie on the floor.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

"The suspects opened fire at five people and a sixth victim was stabbed on the left leg. Three victims aged between 25 and 36 sustained gunshot wounds to the head and died on the scene, while the other victims who sustained gunshot wounds to the head, arm and leg were taken to a local hospital for medical attention," police spokesperson, Captain Nqobile Gwala, said. 
Langa described the murders as shocking. 
"There can be no justification for the callous and brutal manner in which these citizens were killed. We will ensure that our best detectives are assigned to bring the perpetrators to book,” Langa said. 

The attackers stole money, liquor and a cellphone before fleeing the scene on foot. 

The motive for the killing is still unclear at this stage and police are investigating  charges of murder, attempted murder, assault GBH and robbery.

In the second unrelated incident, which occurred last night in the Umkomaas area, three armed men entered a local tavern and ordered everyone to lie on the floor. 

The men then fired shots inside the premises, wounding three people. They fled the scene after stealing TV sets and cellphones. 

Whilst the men were fleeing the scene, they opened fire on a 34-year-old patron and fatally wounded him. 

Another patron who was driving into the premises was also shot at but managed to escape. The suspects took the man's gun and drove off in his vehicle.

The injured victims were transported to a local hospital for medical treatment. Charges of murder, attempted murder and robbery were opened for investigation.

The Mercury