Durban- We have been reporting this topic for more than 20 years - our first mention was around 1996, when the late Rowley Morgan first shook up the establishment with a proposal to build a giant dry dock at the port of Richards Bay.
Morgan owned an engineering business in the town, hence his 
interest. Unfortunately he ran into much of the red tape that one 
encounters with such proposals, before he met his untimely death in an accident.

Since then several ventures attempted to get off the ground, or in the case of a dry dock, into the ground. Gradually, the belief in such a facility for Richards Bay changed to that of a large floating dock - much less expensive and able to achieve the same results.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Department of Transport got into the act and in 2010 announced a South Korean interest in developing the repair facilities - the giant shipbuilding firm of Daewoo was said to have acquired a 49% stake in the Impinda Group, a company under the control of a certain Khulubuse Zuma, the ex-president’s nephew.

People thought this meant a shoo-in for Daewoo and its local partner, but this wasn’t to be, and we heard no more, which has been a familiar story on this topic.

Earlier still, in 2008, Transnet had called for expressions of interest, with the consortium known as Imbani Projects being selected as the preferred bidder. Imbani includes three Chinese partners - Ningbo Industry Investment Liability Company, Ninth Design and Research Institute (China), and Chec Guangzhou Port Construction Co (China) - plus several local companies.

As has become the norm, nothing more was heard of the venture, and eventually the Chinese "walked away", as we were told by the local partner.

This long preamble is included as a prerequisite to the latest report that Transnet has placed a floating dock and ship-repair facility back on the agenda at the Port of Richards Bay, with a call for expressions of interest. 

No doubt there will again be groupings formed, including foreign stakeholders, because a ship repair facility at Richards Bay offers the 
potential of healthy returns.

In a year, the port will have approximately 1850 ship calls with a gross tonnage of 72.2 million tons, indicating that these are all large or at least medium-size ships that make use of the port. 

At the same time, an increasingly large number of ships go to anchor outside the port, either waiting for a berth inside or for orders, that is, on lay-by.

This latest call for expressions of interest comes against a backdrop of the government’s Operation Phakisa drive, which was launched in 2014 with the aim of unlocking the economic potential of the country’s oceans (the so-called “Blue Economy”) to create economic growth and growth opportunities through fast-tracked development.

Transnet SOC Ltd, through the Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA), with its unique position as the landlord ports authority, is an implementing agency for port infrastructure initiatives in the Marine Transport and Manufacturing Delivery Unit of Operation Phakisa.

As a result of this, the installation of a new large floating dock to bolster ship repair capacity at the Port of Richards Bay and to accommodate Capesize vessels, bulk carriers and tankers greater than 150 000dwt, that now cannot be accommodated in any dry dock facility in South Africa, remains on track, according to the TNPA.

The ship-repair facility will be supported by the Richards Bay Industrial Development Zone.

The TNPA says that an infrastructure preparation project to create the conditions for a private operator to install and operate a floating dock through an open market approach has commenced.  

It is expected that a request for proposal will be issued towards the end of quarter one of the 2018 financial year (around about July), dependent on the progress of an environmental assessment.

The repair quay facility, including a floating dock, has been earmarked for the Small Craft Harbour area within the Port of Richards Bay, something that will require deepening of the berth and a makeover of the quay.

According to the TNPA, the project progress for the pre-feasibility (FEL 2) study is 90% complete and the overall project status is 23%, with a forecast completion date of March 2022.

The environmental impact assessment is in the hands of Sivest Environmental Consultants, who are undertaking a basic assessment report. The forecast record of decision date is set for September this year. 

The draft basic assessment report was meanwhile sent to the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA), the DEA Oceans and Coast Branch, KZN Wildlife, the Department of Water Affairs, the local and district municipality as well as the Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs on March 7.

The new business development department is in the process of appointing a transactional adviser, with a forecast date for June.

On the basis of this, dare we hope that this time round, the matter of a ship repair and floating dock facility at the Port of Richards Bay will finally come to fruition?
The Mercury