Durban - More than 4000 drivers were caught speeding on South African roads this Easter weekend.
The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC), yesterday said exceeding the speed limit topped the list of the top five traffic offences for which notices were issued between Thursday night and Saturday morning. 

Almost 2000 others were nabbed driving unlicensed vehicles, about the same number for driving without driver’s licences, almost 1400 were driving without their seatbelts and just more than 900 were fined for driving vehicles with worn tyres.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

While KZN road crash statistics were not yet available, there have been two major crashes in the province in which more than 20 people have died.

On Thursday, 14 people died in a horror crash on the R33 between Greytown and Dundee, and six pedestrians were killed in a crash on Saturday on Edendale Road in Pietermaritzburg. 

In Saturday’s crash, a seventh person, the driver of the bakkie that had knocked into pedestrians, died after allegedly being assaulted by community members.

ER24 spokesperson Werner Vermaak said: “It is understood from bystanders that members of the community allegedly stabbed the driver to death shortly after the incident. Seven others were treated on the scene for injuries ranging from moderate to serious. They were all treated and rushed to a nearby hospital for further medical care.” 

On Friday, one person died and 16 others were injured in a crash between a car and a taxi on the R34 between Vryheid and Melmoth according to EMS spokesperson Rob McKenzie. 

KwaZulu-Natal transport department spokesperson Kwanele Ncalane said Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda would be briefed on the Easter traffic report tomorrow morning. 

While this was being finalised, Ncalane said observations indicated that this was one of the worst periods on KwaZulu-Natal roads in terms of road crashes and fatalities. 

“We will be reflecting on all the factors with a view of intervening. We were hoping we would be able to sustain the downward trend as during the festive season we observed a 10% decrease in road fatalities but seemingly there is still a long way to go.”

In preparation for the busy Easter period, the department put in place an integrated plan where Kaunda met with all heads of transport and other law enforcement agencies. 

Ncalane said the impact of this would be assessed and reviewed. 

“It is, however, clear from preliminary observations that most of the major fatal accidents were as a result of human behaviour. 

“The major accidents were caused by the reckless nature of drivers who have a complete disregard for traffic laws. Moving forward we need a clear strategy on how we are going to achieve much-needed behavioural change on our roads,” he said.
The Mercury