Durban - Nelson Mandela’s widow Graça Machel paid tribute to her unique “older sister” Winnie Madikizela-Mandela at a memorial hosted by the Nelson Mandela Foundation at Constitution Hill on Monday.
In marking the countdown to what would have been Nelson Mandela’s 100th birthday, the  Foundation held the memorial to honour the late Struggle icon.

As one of the close family members mourning her death, Machel said she was taking her time to process her pain and preferred to be quiet, to feel it and go through it. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Unable to hold back her tears, Machel shared her concerns for the late Madikizela-Mandela’s daughters, Zindziswa  and Zenani , who are now facing life without the matriarch of the family. 

Machel said: “Zenani and Zindzi, who were under Mama’s wings She was there. These children have had very little of an upbringing from their father. 

“They were toddlers when Madiba went to prison and when he came back they were young women, married with children. So for them, Mama bore a big tree”.

She said that her pain has been heavier since the passing of Madikizela-Mandela. 

She added that the Madikizela-Mandela family were no ordinary family after sacrificing and dedicating their whole lives to liberate and fight for the people of the country. 

“There is no one who will be able to fill the space in their lives,” she said. 

“We have been blessed to have Madiba as the head and Mama as the matriarch of the family. I want you to understand why we are so shaken, why we are still confused and because we don’t have the courage of our parents we fear the future,” said Machel. 

She reflected on the late Struggle stalwart’s fight for education and the people using the example of her support for the the nationwide #FeesMustFall marches. 

“If Mama was giving soup to people in Soweto, who is going to attend to them now and do it? 

“If Mama was comforting young people, whenever they need her, her door was opened to them. Who is going to stand (up) and do that?” she said. 

Ndileka Mandela, eldest grandchild of Nelson Mandela and representing the family, said the family would need continued support.  

Mandela said: “It’s still very sore. Mummy took us by surprise. It is quite significant that this memorial is held here today because this is the place that big Mummy spent time in solitary confinement and where she received the news of my father’s accident.

“As a family we would like to say we still need you, quite a lot. We need your support. 

“My cousins and aunts are gutted as I am, but I felt the need to honour this event ­because of the significance of the hundred days for grand-dad.  To the general public we say thank you so much.” 

Mandela said maWinnie’s life was a struggle and that the Mother of the Nation got a raw deal and they wanted to bury her with  dignity. 
The Mercury