Durban - Left arm spinner Senuran Muthusamy was named the Hollywoodbets Dolphins Player of the Year at the franchise’s annual end-of-season prize giving awards at Mount Edgecombe on Wednesday evening, crowning a domestic season in which the Durban born-and-raised left hander has made telling contributions with the ball and the bat.

One of the leading wicket takers in the Sunfoil Series, Muthusamy has been pivotal to the Hollywoodbets Dolphins competitive edge in the 2017/18 season, showing his ability to throttle back opponents run rates and take wickets at vital stages in a match, while also contributing in the middle order, where the Dolphins resilience has helped turn a number of vital matches round.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In addition to winning the Player of the Year Award Muthusamy also won the prestigious Players’ Player of the Year Award, Sunfoil Series Bowler of the Year and Player of the Tournament and the Hollywoodbets Blue Collar of the Year Award for the player who does the most for team, on and off the field.

"I felt that I didn't start the season well with the bat but I am grateful that I was able to pull it together and finish the season strong," Muthusamy said.

"Moving down the batting order slightly allowed me to play as more of an all-rounder and takes a bit of pressure off me after I was opening the batting and bowling.

"I'm grateful that I have been able to find a role in the team that helps us win cricket games."

“Senuran richly deserves these awards,” said CEO Heinrich Strydom. “His call up to the SA A side reflects a season where he has been consistently strong with both the bat and the ball.”

“He characterises the toughness that has been emerging in the Dolphins team this season, and has made us respected by all our opponents,” he added.

“He is a player that has come through the ranks since he was spotted as a Durban schoolboy, and to get the franchises premier award speaks volumes about the way he has been nurtured through the ranks in this province,” he added.

“With Keshav Maharaj committing a lot of his time to the Proteas, Sen stepped up and showed himself to be a hugely talented all-rounder,” Strydom added.

His words were echoed by the KwaZulu-Natal Cricket Union president Fa-eez Jaffer, who said that all the signs were positive for the emergence of coach Grant Morgan’s side as genuine title challengers.

“We made two finals this season and won one, and we played our cricket with aggression and enthusiasm, and when it was needed, there was plenty of fighting spirit,” said Jaffer.

“We were delighted to end the season with the emphatic victory of our KZN Coastal side in the Sunfoil Cup final against Namibia inside two days,” he added. “It was a very positive way for us to end our season and provides the perfect springboard for us to build towards the future.” 

Spinners dominated the Dolphins awards, with Prenelan Subrayen taking the award for the Momentum One Day Cup Player of the Tournament, and Keshav Maharaj winning the equivalent award for the Ram Slam tournament.

Vaughn van Jaarsveld won the Fans Player Award.

AWARDS
SUNFOIL SERIES 
Fielder of the year 2017/18 Dane Vilas 
Bowler of the Year 2017/18 Senuran Muthusamy
Batsman of the Year 2017/18 Vaughn Van Jaarsveld

MOMENTUM ODC 
Fielder of the year 2017/18 Sibonelo Makhanya
Bowler of the Year 2017/18 Prenelan Subrayen
Batsman of the Year 2017/18 SJ Erwee

RAM SLAM T20 
Fielder of the year 2017/18 Prenelan Subrayen
Bowler of the Year 2017/18 Robbie Frylinck
Batsman of the Year 2017/18 Morné Van Wyk

PLAYER OF THE TOURNAMENT 
SUNFOIL SERIES: Player of the year 2017/18 Senuran Muthusamy
MOMENTUM ODC: Player of the year 2017/18 Senuran Muthusamy
RAM SLAM: Player of the year 2017/18 Morné van Wyk

Hollywoodbets Blue Collar of the year: Senuran Muthusamy

Fans Player brought to you by Pelican Pharmacy: Vaughn Van Jaarsveld

Brand Ambassador: Keshav Maharaj

Most valuable player: Dane Vilas

Players Player of the year brought to you by Toddler Park: Senuran Muthusamy

Player of the Year: Senuran Muthusamy
The Mercury