Durban - Delays in the eThekwini Municipality securing vacant land for cemeteries has prompted the 
National Funeral Practitioners Association (Nafupa) of South 
Africa to issue an ultimatum to city officials.
Purchase the land by August - two months into the start of the municipality’s new financial year - or they will expropriate the land without compensation.

However, the municipality has cautioned that such moves are illegal and could lead to prosecution.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nafupa has also threatened to go ahead with burials on the land if the city’s department of Parks, Recreation and Culture does not finalise the land deal by the August deadline.

Nafupa president Muzi Hlengwa said expropriation of land without compensation was an ANC policy they were not afraid to adopt.

The association made headlines earlier this year after declaring that Indian and white funeral 
parlours should be banned from conducting funerals in townships

Nafupa said it was also challenging a tender awarded to a single service provider by the municipality for pauper and indigent burials.

They claim the local service provider had been benefiting from this tender for years - with each burial costing the city between R2500 and R4000.

Hlengwa said they believed all funeral practitioners should be allowed to conduct pauper or indigent burials.

“We want an end to all tenders in the funeral industry. Indigent families should be able to choose an undertaker and then invoice the municipality,” he said.

The association is expected to march to the Durban City Hall tomorrow, where they hope to hand over a memorandum to eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede.

Hlengwa said the delays in the purchasing of the vacant land was not acceptable.

Last month the municipality announced that it had set aside an estimated R216 million to buy vacant land for cemeteries in Vulamehlo outside of eManzimtoti, Cato Ridge and Hammarsdale. 

Two additional sites were also identified in Phoenix and eMkhomazi. 

Once fully operational, these burial sites are expected to only reach capacity in around 50 years. 

Force

Said Hlengwa: “They have identified land and set aside money, yet nothing is happening. If they do not purchase the land, we will take it by force for burials. 

“As a black person, we do not have land to build a house when we are alive. When we die, we still cannot get a 1 metre by 2 metre piece of land to rest peacefully. 

“These people (the municipality) need to get serious about this issue” said Hlengwa. 

Thembinkosi Ngcobo, head of Parks, Recreation and Culture, under which cemeteries fall, said the municipality was actively working to deal with the shortage of burial land. 

“We are progressing as far as decisions go. We have identified the land and set aside money. But we are still in negotiations with the landowners. 

“The reality is that not all 
the land is owned by the muni-
cipality.

“We ask that people exercise patience. We have to work together and are always open to engagement with communities and stakeholders,” said Ngcobo. 

However, he cautioned that to carry out burials on private property without approval was an 
offence and would have legal consequences. 

He said there had been cases where people had been penalised for illegal burials but as far as he could recall, not to the extent where bodies were exhumed. 

With regard to pauper or indigent burials, Ngcobo confirmed it was being done by one service provider.

He said the tender was advertised every few years to allow for new bidders to apply.

“Historically, we know that this tender is not appealing for many undertakers because it is not financially lucrative.”

He said the issue had been raised internally and a suggestion was made for different service providers to be appointed in at least four areas of the city. 

“There are a number of challenges and a number of solutions have been proposed. But we have not yet finalised anything,” he said. 

The issue of burials in the city related to land ownership and other factors are being probed by the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities. 

Mayor Gumede is expected to appear before the Commission as the hearings on access to burial sites or graves continue this week.
The Mercury