Durban - Gabisile Shabane, a 13-year-old girl with albinism who was kidnapped with another child from their home in Hlalanikahle, in Mpumalanga, was forced to smoke dagga and drink a vehicle’s brake fluid mixed with beer shortly before she was murdered, the Witbank Magistrate’s Court heard on Wednesday.
“Accused number one (traditional healer Thokozani Msibi) mixed brake fluid with beer and forced Gabisile to drink it. She was also forced to smoke dagga with accused number two (Brilliant Mkhize),” State prosecutor Fanie Mavundla said. 

He was reading an affidavit in opposition of bail for Mkhize, Themba Thubane and Knowledge Mhlanga.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The evidence in the affidavit by investigating officer Colonel Ngina Masombuka was obtained by the police from State witness Thulani Thobela, he said.

Headless

Mavundla said Gabisele’s headless body was found buried in a shallow grave in Cullinan, east of Pretoria, in February, with parts missing.

“The missing parts were the arms, heart, lungs, vagina, uterus, ovaries, all the abdominal organs and the bladder. The head, one arm and a part of the vagina were later found at the home of accused number one,” said Mavundla.

Msibi, who was also in the dock yesterday, was denied bail by the same court on March 6.

Gabisile and 15-month-old Nkosikhona Ngwenya were kidnapped from their home on January 28, allegedly by three men who entered the house through a broken window. 

Nkosikhona’s body was found on the side of the N4 freeway in Mpumalanga in the third week of February.

Mavundla said Gabisile was killed so that Msibi could use her body parts to create muti for Thubane and Mhlanga to make their business - a private college - thrive. Mkhize wanted Msibi to make him rich through the same muti, he added.

Defence lawyer Mzamo Sibisi, for Thubane and Mhlanga, disputed the evidence presented by Mavundla, saying it was unconstitutionally obtained.

Magistrate Darleen Venter postponed the matter to today for judgment. - African News Agency (ANA)