Durban - Scores of eThekwini councillors across the city were left unable to provide residents with proof of address letters after City Hall ran out of printing paper.
On Wednesday, the city admitted that there was a shortage of paper, but said there was no record of councillors who did not have the proof of address letters, which are printed ­centrally at the municipality’s internal printing centre.

The printing centre is also responsible for printing documents such as agendas and circulars for councillors.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The shortage of paper at City Hall was due to an ­appeal lodged by an aggrieved company shortly after the city had awarded the contract. The contract was halted immediately, and this led to the shortage,” the municipality spokesperson, Tozi Mthethwa, said.

She added that the city had since appointed a company to provide paper pending the finalisation of the dispute over the contract.

“However, the Speaker’s ­office does not have any record of councillors that have not received their proof of address letters due to the paper shortage. The proof of address letters are available to councillors,” Mthethwa said. 

However, this was disputed by some city councillors. 

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said the city running out of paper was an indication that the municipality was in shambles.

“For the longest of time, the DA has been saying that this municipality cannot get the ­basics right, and nowhere is that more obvious than running out of paper,” she said.

Graham said councillors were unable to provide services to communities, and hadn't received agendas for committees as was normally the case.

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi, a member of the city’s executive committee, said he was disappointed that the city was downplaying this “crisis”.

Nkosi said he had been approached by scores of councillors, even those who were outside of his party, who claimed that they were not able to ­execute their duties due to the printing paper shortage.

“It is perfectly normal to have these (contract) awards being disputed, but the city should try and prevent these things by not waiting until the very last moment before awarding tenders. Contracts should be awarded early to prevent such a thing from happening again,” he said.

Councillors who spoke to The Mercury confirmed they were unable to carry out their duties due to the printing paper shortage. 

Johnson Chetty, a councillor for Ward 106 (which covers Verulam and Waterloo), said he first tried to make a requisition about two weeks ago and was told there was no paper.

On Wednesday, the councillor said he once again made a requisition but was again told there was no paper. 

“I have just followed up with councillor support (division), and I was told there was no change in the status, the matter is not yet resolved. It is sad because in my office I get on average between 30 to 40 requests for proof of address letters, and I am running out of these. This is a worrisome matter,” he said.

An ANC councillor, who asked not to be named, also confirmed the paper shortage. 

“People on the ground are angry with us because we cannot provide them with documents, and this is something that is not in our control,” he said.
The Mercury