Durban - With the KZN Philharmonic currently between seasons, following the end of its recent summer symphony season, our musical focus has shifted to music of a more intimate nature, with the focus on Baroque and chamber music.
Baroque 2000 offers a fascinating programme of High Baroque classics of the Italian and German schools for their second 2018 concert, on Sunday  at the Church of the Mariannhill Monastery. The programme includes: the Sonata a Quatro by Alessandro Scarlatti (1660 - 1725); the Oboe Concerto Opus 9 No 2 in D minor by Tomaso Albinoni (1671- 1751); a Trio Sonata by Haydn’s teacher, Nicola Porpora (1686 - 1768); Telemann’s Double Violin Concerto in E minor; and JS Bach’s Concerto for Oboe and Violin in D minor BWV 1060. The soloists are violinist Ralitza Macheva and Refiloe Olifant, oboe player Margrit Deppe. Tickets at the door are R150. Ample and safe parking is available. The monastery tea garden will be open with specials for concert goers. More information from Michel at sursouth@iafrica.com or on 082 303 5241.

Following on from the welcome spirit of collaboration that has developed recently between Durban’s Friends of Music and Pietermaritzburg’s Music Revival initiatives, pianist Christopher Duigan and cellist Aristide Du Plessis will share FOM’s recital platform on Tuesday, April 10, performing an enticing double bill. The first half of the evening sees Duigan performing a selection of his highly popular George Gershwin programme that wowed KZN audiences recently. Works to be heard include Rhapsody in Blue, The Gershwin Songbook (18 Song Transcriptions) and Three Preludes.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Cellist Du Plessis steps forward after intermission when he joins Duigan in performing Sergei Rachmaninoff’s Titanic Sonata for Cello and Piano Op 19. 

The programme will be complemented with pieces by Caccini, Tchaikovsky and Piazolla. The recital starts at 7.30pm at the Durban Jewish Centre, 44 KE Masinga Road. Tickets for members are R100, non-members R120, students and orchestra members, R20, and are available at the door. There is safe parking. To book, call 071 505 1021.

Looking ahead, Music revival presents a programme titled Music For Flute And Jazz Piano Trio for its monthly concerts across KZN. This light-hearted and infectious concoction of jazz and classical styles will be by the contemporary French jazz composer Claude Bolling, and will feature Sabine Baird - KZNPO’s Principal Flute, with Christopher Duigan at the piano. Percussionist Stephane Pechoux (drums) and Yuri Litvinenko (bass), both members of the KZNPO, will join them in the jazz trio. The first half of the programme includes a sequence of beautiful melodies and popular flute solos, including Gluck’s Dance of the Blessed Sprits, Sicillienne by Gabriel Faure, the jaunty Badinerie  by J.S Bach, and Bizet’s Entr’acte to Act III from Carmen.

Performances will take place as follows: Saturday April, 21, 7pm at Grace Hall, Ashton International College, Albertina Way, Ballito. Tickets are R150, with coffee and cake included at interval.

 There is secure parking, and seating is unreserved. A performance will take place on Sunday, April 22 at 11.30am in the Tatham Art Gallery in Pietermaritzburg. Tickets are R80, and there is secure parking.

A Tatham Exhibition Opening takes place earlier at 10am.

Make a day of it and enjoy coffee or lunch at Cafe Tatham, which is open from 10am. Booking for lunch is essential, and can be done through Cafe Tatham on 033 342 8327.

Next is a performance on Monday, April 23 at 7pm in Howick’s Amber Auditorium, for residents and their guests only.

 Tickets at R60 can be obtained from the Amber Valley Office. On Tuesday, April 24 the programme is presented in Kloof’s St Agnes Church, at 7.30pm. Tickets are R100, and include refreshments at interval. St Agnes Concerts will now take place on Tuesdays, usually the last of the month.

The venue for Saturday, April 28 is Casa Mexicana at 35 Montgomery Drive, Athlone - Pietermaritzburg. 

The venue opens at 7pm. Patrons can bring their own wine, and other refreshments are provided. There is secure parking. 

Booking for these events is preferred, and can be made on booking@musicrevival.co.za or Music Revival 083 417 4473 (SMS or WhatsApp only). Please include your contact numbers in all email bookings.
The Mercury