Durban - A Nelson Mandela Bay re-scheduled special council meeting meant to deal with several motions, including a motion to have mayor Athol Trollip ousted, once again descended into chaos and collapsed on Tuesday.
In the run-up to the meeting collapsing, each political party was given five minutes to pay tribute to the late anti-apartheid Struggle stalwart Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who died on April 2 in Milpark Hospital, Joburg, after a long illness.

However, opposition parties were unhappy with Nqaba Bhanga from the DA paying tribute to her and a shouting match ensued. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

During the sitting, opposition councillors also raised concerns that the flag in council chambers, situated behind city manager Johann Mettler, was not at half mast out of respect for Madikezela-Mandela. 

Opposition councillors continuously hurled insults at Bhanga, with the ANC accusing him of being a “murderer”. 

Bhanga later explained that his bodyguard was involved in an accident in which two people were killed. 

The EFF’s Zilindile Vena said: “He [Bhanga] is standing for everything that Mama Winnie was fighting against. He is standing against land which Mama Winnie lived for. We want to save five minutes that will be wasted”. 

The atmosphere grew tense when Bhanga was given an opportunity to speak and pay tribute to Madikizela-Mandela, but while doing so his voice could barely be heard as opposition parties drowned him out in song. 

Shortly after Bhanga concluded the tribute, Speaker Jonathan Lawack said that opposition parties were intentionally collapsing the
meeting. 

The special sitting, convened because of motions brought by the EFF, ANC, United Front and the United Democratic Movement (UDM) was adjourned permanently by midday. 

DA councillors left the chambers while the opposition parties broke out in song about Winnie Madikezela-Mandela and Chris Hani. 

The opposition councillors continued to have their own meeting without council officials. The UDM’s Mongameli Bobani, who promised not to cause any disruption during the sitting, addressed opposition councillors saying that the opposition parties exercised discipline. 

“We did not collapse the meeting, we were so disciplined today. It was the DA and the Speaker who decided to collapse the meeting. 

“This is our meeting, we called this meeting not the Speaker, so the Speaker did not have a right to adjourn our own meeting. We want our meeting to continue but we can’t because there are no officials,” said Bobani. 

Bobani said no further council meetings would take place until such time as the motions were dealt with. 

Following the drama, the DA-lead coalition held a press conference together with new recruit, the Patriotic Alliance’s Marlon Daniels. 

Trollip said the sitting yesterday was stalled by the same people who had stalled the motions being debated at council at the last sitting earlier last month.

“He (Lawack) made it clear he wanted this debate to proceed. It had been stalled for eight hours at the last occasion by the very people sponsoring the motion,” Trollip said. 

“He wanted the matter to be debated and discussed but he was not going to tolerate the same chaos that happened last time. It’s abundantly clear, the people who again allowed this council to degenerate into chaos, and the irony is they blame the Speaker.

“I want to appeal to the media to tell the story the way it is. Was it the Speaker who wanted to collapse the council or was it the opposition parties who wanted to collapse the council? Please report it as it is, there was a clear strategy, one hand went up after the other to make sure the council descended into chaos.” 

Trollip said Lawack had made it clear that if the sitting was disrupted the meeting would come to an end. 

If the opposition parties wanted to re-introduce the motions, they would have to find 61 signatures and petition Lawack again. 

In addition to have Trollip ousted, other motions included the removal of Lawack and Chief Whip of Council, Werner Senekal, the dismantling of the entire mayoral committee team and bringing back the position of deputy mayor. 

The EFF needed the support of every other opposition party, including the ANC, to make up the 61-vote majority in the council of 120 seats. 

The DA and its remaining coalition partners, Congress of the People (Cope) and the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP), together have 59 seats, while the ANC has 50, the EFF six, the UDM two and the PA, African Independent Congress (AIC) and UF one each. 

Daniels previously said he would support Trollip in the latest motion, while the lone AIC councillor was reportedly instructed to vote with the DA against the motion. - African News Agency (ANA)