Durban - The woman on trial for the hit-and-run death of an off-duty Durban metro police officer is facing up to 15 years in jail after being found guilty of culpable homicide. 
Delivering judgment in the Durban Regional Court earlier this week, magistrate Simphiwe Hlophe found Nozipho Nzimande to have been grossly negligent in the April 2012 death of 26-year-old Phumlani Mbatha. Nzimande and Solomon will be sentenced on July 10.

Mbatha died at Addington Hospital after being knocked over by Nzimande, who was driving up King Dinuzulu (Berea) Road. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He was found about 1.5km away from the point of impact as Nzimande had driven with him lodged on the roof of her car. His legs and arms were broken and he had head injuries but was still breathing. 

A witness testified to having seen a car with a person on the roof. 

After the collision, Nzimande had driven to her friend John Solomon’s house. 

Solomon, who lives in South Africa but is an American national, was charged with defeating the ends of justice and being an accessory to murder after the fact.

He pleaded not guilty to all charges but was yesterday found guilty of the latter charge. 

He had arranged for Nzimande’s car to be towed to a panel beater but it was seized by police en route. 

Solomon conducted his own defence and claimed to have not been aware of the crash. 

However, in his judgment, Hlophe noted it was “strange accused 2 arranged for panel beaters so late at night before he could even hear the whole story of what happened before reporting the incident to police”.

In her testimony, Nzimande had told the court she had feared for her life when Mbatha approached, walking across the road. She had switched lanes to avoid him fearing it was a hijacking attempt. 

She claimed he was carrying something and threw it at her car making a loud bang. 

However, in his judgment, Hlophe said: “There is no 
person who would abandon 
the sense of safety and run 
into the traffic and go for a vehicle that was on the far end of the road, the third lane, and leave those which were closer to him.”

He also questioned her story about the attempted
hijacking as she did not report this to the police. 

“Through the evidence in chief, both accused tried by all means to avoid the word
accident,” he said.

Hlophe described Nzimande as having become evasive on some questions during cross-examination. 

Following the judgment, Mbatha’s mother Nonhlanhla said she was relieved at the guilty verdict and was grateful to State prosecutor Krishen Shah for the work he did on 
the case. 

However, she believes being found guilty of the lesser crime of culpable homicide 
was a slap on the wrist as it carried a maximum sentence of 15 years. 

“I believe the way she handled things after hitting him showed intention, all their actions after point to them knowingly trying to hide what they did and trying to cover it up. They have no remorse because they knew exactly what they were doing,” she said. 

Nonhlanhla said it was important for her to attend Nzimande and Solomon’s every appearance in court, not only because she wanted to see the matter through, but also to give them, especially Nzimande, a chance to look her in the eye and apologise. 

“Not once has she or any of her family taken the initiative to simply say to us, ‘sorry’. We were willing to forgive because it will bring us peace.”

She said every time she came to court it would open up the wound of the “cruel” manner in which her son died. 

She said Phumlani’s death had been such a devastating blow to the family, his father had a stroke and had died nine months later. 

“This has had a profound impact on our family but she does not seem to care. What she did was cruel.” 

The Mercury