Durban - Addington Hospital’s new cancer machine has arrived and will be in use for the treatment of patients by June. 

This is according to Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo who said on Wednesday that the machine was currently being installed. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The hospital had not been able to treat cancer patients who need radiotherapy after a bungle in the maintenance contracts of the two R150 million state-of-the-art machines. 

This has largely been blamed for the cancar crisis in the province, in which the South African Human Rights Commission has since intervened. The manufacturer of the machines, Varian, which previously did not operate in South Africa, has taken over the installation and maintenance. 

“I may as well add that the maintenance service contracts of these machines are being finalised by the National Department of Health on behalf of the KZN Department of Health,” said Dhlomo. 

 In the meantime Addington Hospital continue to treat about 450 patients chemotherapy and follow-up patients per month, he said. 

“At Grey’s Hospital, it is business as usual as we still have four oncologists based there and are able to attend to a total of about 140 new patients and 500 follow up patients per month.” At  Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital, oncology services were by run three Wits Health Consortium oncologists on a six month contract. 

“According to this contract, Wits Health Consortium will see a total of 150 new patients and 300 follow-up patients per month. In the northern region, for the first time, we now have successfully established collaboration with the Joint Medical House of Oncologists, based at the Richards’s Bay private hospital, to treat our public sector cancer patients,” he said. 

The department also had a satellite cancer treatment site at the Ngwelezane/Queen Nandi Hospital complex where patients were receiving radiation therapy every month at an agreed upon rate. 

“Please help us to make our people understand that the key to winning the war against cancer is to get screened regularly, so that problems can be picked up early to allow for early and timeous interventions,” said Dhlomo. 
The Mercury