Durban - The Wushwini Pan African Centre for Arts Culture and Heritage will be hosting an elegant Pan African Evening - a fundraising gala dinner at the Durban ICC on April 26.
The centre is facing financial challenges from not receiving sufficient funding to present its programmes. 

The Gala Dinner will include a sumptuous 3-course meal and an entertaining night filled with music and dance from artists such as Tu Nokwe, Themba Makhathini, Mbuso Khoza, Madala Kunene, a dance extravaganza directed by Reggie Denster as well as Zulu dancers and Gumboot dancers.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Artwork by one of South Africa’s celebrated artists, Welcome Danca, will be up for sale in the foyer.

One of the most picturesque, tenacious and important community arts centres, Wushwini Pan African Centre for Arts Culture and Heritage was launched in 2011, built from a vandalised school. The centre is providing capacity for building the community, especially youth and women. The structure was supported by KZN Department of Arts and Culture and Eager Artists, who are the resident artists at the centre.

Wushwini community is based at KwaNgcolosi, not far from Hillcrest, under inkosi uBhengu, who is the inkosi of KwaNgcolosi, falling under Ward 9. It’s a poverty-stricken area where a large percentage of the community is unemployed.

Wushwini Community is a stone’s throw away from the beautiful Inanda Dam, which exposes the area to tourists, and there is potential for developing rural and cultural tourism. Since its inception, Wushwini has staged spectacular festivals that showcased not only South African works but also Africa and the world. It has trained more than 60 young people who are now active in the industry. 

Some of them have taken part in Mzansi Magic Films, some are part of professional stage productions earning to support their families.

“We have 10 capacity building programmes a year, focusing on women, children and youth. We also have touring productions such as Let My People Go, Chief Albert Luthuli the Musical and King Cetshwayo the Musical to promote our history, culture and heritage to the world,” explains Wushwini’s founder and managing director Jerry Pooe.

Guests will be requested to purchase tables, from R10000 to R20000 a table or R1000 a person.

For more info, or to book your space, contact Pamela Shandu 0739579275, Jerry Pooe on 0837321640 or wushwiniarts@gmail.com.
The Mercury