NORRISTOWN: Jurors could soon hear Bill Cosby’s testimony about giving Quaalude (Mandrax) to women before sex.
This is an old admission that’s taken on new significance at the comedian’s sexual assault retrial after a half-dozen women testified that he drugged and violated them.

Prosecutors were expected to read a transcript of the 2005 testimony as early as yesterday, saving for the very end of their case Cosby’s own words about using the 1970s party drug “the same as a person would say, ‘have a drink’.”ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Quaalude happen to be the drug that young people were using to party with, and there were times when I wanted to have them just in case,” Cosby testified in the deposition, given as part of a lawsuit chief accuser Andrea Constand filed against him.

Cosby settled the lawsuit in 2006 for nearly $3.4million (about R40m).

Cosby, now 80, said in the deposition that he obtained seven prescriptions for Quaalude from his doctor in Los Angeles in the 1970s, ostensibly for a sore back.

The drug was banned in the US in 1982, the same year one of the women who testified, Janice Baker-Kinney, alleges Cosby knocked her out with pills she suspected to be Quaalude and then raped her.

Judge Steven O’Neill ruled that prosecutors could have the Cosby Show star’s deposition testimony read into the record, handing the prosecution a key victory in its effort to portray the comedian as a serial predator.

Cosby said he gave Constand 1½ tablets of the cold and allergy medicine Benadryl to help her relax, then fondled her breasts and genitals, according to the police transcript, which also was read to the jury on Tuesday.

Cosby said Constand never told him to stop and has maintained that the encounter was consensual.

Prosecutors also have several more witnesses to call. They include Judith Regan, who published Cosby accuser Janice Dickinson’s memoir, Constand’s lawyer Bebe Kivitz and a pharmacology expert.

The unsealing of the deposition led prosecutors to reopen Cosby’s criminal case and shredded his good-guy persona as America’s Dad.

Prosecutors won the right to introduce it at his retrial on charges he drugged and molested her at his suburban Philadelphia home. 

The deposition also was included at Cosby’s first trial, which ended with a hung jury last year.

Montgomery County Detective James Reape, who has been working on the Cosby investigation since it was reopened in 2015, told jurors he wasn’t concerned about inconsistencies the defence played up in Constand’s story - such as her early uncertainty over the date of the alleged assault - because Cosby’s testimony had filled in many of the blanks.

As the comedian arrived yesterday morning, spokesperson Andrew Wyatt blasted the testimony from Reape and a police sergeant. 

He said prosecutors were using “tools of incompetence to build monuments of nothingness.” .