Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education appears to be heading for financial trouble as it needs an additional R165million in the next two months to fund the pupil transport function it is taking over from the Transport Department.
Pupil transport provides free transport to thousands of pupis across the province so they don't have to walk long distances to school.  

The department will take over the function from July. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It has already taken over providing transport to 12 schools in Nquthu, following a court order that was taken by consent last year after litigation brought by education rights body, Equal Education.

It has budgeted around R206m for the function, but will need to spend around R371m in the 2018-19 financial year. This has created a budgeting hole of R165m. 

About R11m of the funds will be paid to a company that will monitor the condition of the buses.

Chairperson of the finance portfolio committee, Sipho Nkosi, said the issue of pupil transport was one of their ­biggest concerns when they engaged with education officials this week.

“Our question to them was why they felt the need to take over the function from Transport, because they do not have the money for it. Transport could absorb such costs because of their R200m budget,” Nkosi said.

“They need about R165m extra to run the pupil transport function, and have said they would find it.”

Compromised

He added: “What we will not accept is that this important function be compromised in any way. We cannot accept that learners will have to travel long distances to school on foot. The department will have to prioritise from its own ­functions to find the money.”

He said another problem was vacancies, as the department had about 2040 vacant posts. “They cannot fill those vacancies because they have no money, which raises another question: Who is going to be doing those jobs?

“It is clear there is money in the department; it is how that money is spent that is a problem. How do they spend R109m on sanitary towels that are even supplied to junior primary schools, and that nobody needs? Even principals are complaining about the sani­tary towels taking space in classrooms and libraries,” he said. 

Chairperson of the education portfolio committee, Linda Hlongwa, said they were not pleased that a monitoring company would be paid R11m for pupil transport. 

Hlongwa said they had hoped the department would be able to assist more learners. 

It currently transports about 47000 learners, while the unofficial figure of pupils needing assistance is estimated at 90000. 

“We are happy they have taken over the function, but the way it was done was not correct. It seems the department wanted to create work for people for reasons known only to them,” she said.

Department spokesperson, Muzi Mahlambi, said the budget shortfall was also ­because they had taken over new routes, like in Nquthu. 

“We are currently in talks with the Treasury Department on how we should fund that shortfall,” he said.  
The Mercury