Durban - The SABC has warned Parliament that a ban on the advertising of alcohol, and the sugar levy, risked reducing its profit.
The losses, along with a R1.2billion risk in contingent liabilities (unforeseen future events), were in addition to a fine from the Competition Commission Tribunal the public broadcaster faces in 2018/19.

Briefing the communications portfolio committee on the budget yesterday, acting chief financial officer Thabile Dlamini said they had not factored in the impact of the ban on alcohol advertising and the sugar levy on the SABC’s budget.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We are highlighting the fact that there is a looming ban on advertising alcohol on television, as well as the sugar ­beverage levy that we may have,” Dlamini said.

The bills on alcohol advertising and the sugary drinks levy are being processed by Parliament before being signed into law by President Cyril Ramaphosa.

Another risk was the fine to be imposed by the tribunal for collusive advertising.

“What we need to highlight is that the impact of this fine is huge, and we have not factored it in the numbers,” Dlamini said.

The SABC also has a lot of contingent liabilities, which stood at R900million at the end of last month.

“This year we anticipate that we may sit on about R1.2billion, which is not reflected in the numbers either,” she told MPs.

Dlamini said another risk was the issue of acquiring sports rights, and the SABC intended not to enter into any new commitments with sports rights holders.

The SABC wanted to generate at least R7bn in revenue with R5.2bn raised from advertising, R1bn from television licence fees, and R253m in government grants and other sources.

It also wants to cut its losses from R973m recorded in 2016/17 to R287.6m this financial year.

However, Dlamini said their projections showed cash flow challenges.

“Our cash flow forecast for next year still indicates that we need to have that injection from the banks,” she said.

Board chairman Bongu­musa Makhathini said gone were the days when things were done at the SABC despite the lack of resources.

“We want to get normality. When you can’t afford it, you can’t just do it,” Makhathini said.

Committee chairman Humphrey Maxegwana said there was a need to back their call for an increased government grant.

The ANC’s Mziwamadoda Kalako urged the SABC to come with a proposal on the increase. “If you don’t, we will be in this cycle every financial year,” he warned.
The Mercury