Durban - Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Minister Zweli Mkhize has ordered an investigation into allegations of administrative malfeasance at the Msunduzi Municipality.
The investigation comes after senior deputy city managers wrote to Mkhize, KwaZulu-Natal Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube and the National Assembly, calling for a probe into certain allegations.

A senior official in the municipality, who asked not to be named, confirmed that the request for an investigation had been sent and that they had received a reply from
Mkhize.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It is also understood that municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe is not among those calling for the investigation. 

In a response to the call for the investigation, the minister, in a letter, said he had requested Dube-Ncube to investigate the allegations and to provide him with a report.

“I have also requested her to ensure that appropriate action is taken against any responsible party or parties if the investigation finds that any of your allegations are true.

“My department looks forward to further co-operation with you and your municipality to ensure that the municipality succeeds in the performance of its mandate,” said the letter.

The senior official said: “Politically and administratively, there are problems. There is a document (regarding the allegations) that we have prepared, but we cannot share it until the probe starts.”

DA member of the provincial legislature Mergan Chetty said Mkhize should extend the investigation to Cogta provincial offices as they had actively enabled the malfeasance at Msunduzi. “There is too much infighting in that municipality, even among the ANC deployees. 

“This past Wednesday there was a march by the community to the ANC offices in the Moses Mabhida region demanding that the party recalls some councillors.

“Last month there was another march to the city hall with the community complaining about service delivery,” Chetty said. 

He said some of the concerns included the irregular appointment of Hadebe and the employment of former DA councillor Clive Lotz as manager in the council speaker’s office. 

Other issues include the ­financial crisis, depleted funds, the non-payment of service providers, suspension of senior staff with pay indefinitely, and service delivery strikes due to poor management.

“We want the minister to put this municipality under administration pending the investigation into its affairs. If the rot is as deep as we suspect, we want the council to be dissolved,” Chetty said.

Cogta provincial spokesperson Lennox Mabaso said they had received the letters from Mkhize and the staff and were already conducting a fact-finding investigation at the Msunduzi Municipality to establish whether sufficient grounds existed to proceed with a full investigation.

“We had received allegations from staff members, and our guys (legal experts) will tell us whether the allegations made by the staff require a different investigation (from the fact-finding probe).” 

Mabaso said Dube-Ncube and Mkhize were constantly in contact about the state of municipalities and had both made an undertaking to take action against those bringing municipalities in the province into disrepute. 
The Mercury