Durban - The DA is heading for a collision course with President Cyril Ramaphosa over the appointment of former State Security Agency (SSA) director-general Arthur Fraser as the national commissioner of the Correctional Services Department.
This comes after the official opposition threatened to take Fraser’s appointment on judicial review following Ramaphosa’s failure to answer questions around his new appointment.

DA leader Mmusi Maimane wanted to know the appointment process of Fraser, and whether his alleged conduct at the SSA was taken into account.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He gave Ramaphosa, who was at the time wooing investors in the UK, until last Thursday to respond to his questions.

Maimane said Ramaphosa had failed to meet the deadline, and had yet to respond.

“In light of the president’s failure to reply, the DA will challenge the lawfulness of Fraser’s appointment - particularly whether it was procedurally and substantively rational in light of Fraser’s track record,” he said.

“Fraser’s co-ordination of a parallel intelligence network should have been reason to fire him, and not ­rehire him in a different capacity,” Maimane said, adding that the ­shuffling of compromised individuals within government departments could not be allowed to continue.

Yesterday, Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, Khusela Diko, said the laws of the country allowed for anyone to request explanations of decisions made by the executive.

“The president applied his mind to the appointment of Mr Fraser. He was exercising his right to redetermine the heads of departments,” Diko said.

She also said the appointment was not just about Fraser, as the president was busy with reshuffling heads in other departments.

“If the DA wishes to take the legal route, the president will respond,” Diko added.

DA communications manager Mabine Seabe confirmed that they were going ahead with the judicial review of Fraser’s appointment to the new position.

He referred further questions to DA federal council chairperson James Selfe, who could not be reached for comment.

Fraser was shifted from the SSA last week, as the High Court in Pretoria was due to hear an application brought by Inspector General of Intelligence Setlhomamaru Dintwe, after Fraser threatened to revoke his licence and withdraw his security clearance, and allegedly interfered with his duties.

Dintwe had, in court papers, alleged that Fraser was trying to block an investigation into serious allegations against him, and claimed Fraser was threatening him.

However, Fraser was moved to Correctional Services and Loyiso Jafta appointed acting SSA director general following consultations with Ramaphosa.