Durban - Motorists have been falling victim to beggars on the streets pretending to be disabled and in need of financial help.
According to Reaction Unit South Africa (Rusa) they have received several calls from the public because they have fallen victim to beggars and car guards posing as disabled, with the intention to collect money or to rob them.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Prem Balram, Rusa spokesperson, said they have two pictures taken hours apart, of a teenager posing as a disabled person at a robot and then him walking as normal a while later.
“The suspects in most cases approach a female driver after removing their shirts and twist their arms and legs to appear disabled. Unsuspecting motorist then open their windows to hand over change and the suspect usually grabs their mobile phones or hand bags and flee,” Balram said.
He said the teenager in the pictures has not been involved in any robberies but he collects money at the R102 and Inanda Road intersection near the BP Garage in Verulam.
“He removes his clothes, twist his body and appears to be disabled. He then dresses up and walks away every evening after collecting cash from passing motorists. The public is warned to refrain from fully opening their windows at robots and stop signs to avoid falling victim to this scam,” he said.
According to the eThekwini Municipality by-laws under the nuisances and behaviour in public places by-law, 2015, obstructing, blocking or disturbing of traffic and pedestrians, no person may:

 in a public place, intentionally block or interfere with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or motor-vehicle, unless to the extent authorised by law; or approach any pedestrian or a person inside a motor-vehicle on any public road or public road intersection or any other public place for the purposes of begging from such pedestrian or person in a motor-vehicle."


A Daily News reader has written about a similar incident.

"Beggars at traffic lights and intersections has become such a menace and irritation. Guilt trip syndrome on drivers, the truth of the matter is they are running self made businesses. The portrayal of loss of limbs, sob stories and hobo like images, it’s a exorbitant return and Masood Boomgaard’s video few years ago gave information and evidence to prove it was lucrative instead of working odd jobs or seeking full time employment. People need to realise Charity doesn’t mean helping those who are unwilling to make an effort to work. God won’t punish you if you choose to drive away as they need to make an effort like many who work cleaning toilets and drains or building on 32 degree days. Your R2 is causing unemployment to soar and laziness to breed," Shameema Omar said.
Daily News