Durban - Two men were killed and seven others people injured in three separate incidents on Saturday morning. Rescue Care's Garrith Jamieson, said in the first incident, a emergency crews had to cut through the wreckage of a single-vehicle collision in the Durban Central Business District to extricate a man. 
"At the corner of Dr Pixley kaSeme (West) Street and Dorothy Nyembe (Gardiner) Street, a vehicle carrying six occupants veered out of control and collided with a pole. Most of the people on the back of the bakkie were ejected. A total of five patients sustained injuries ranging from serious to critical with two of the critically injured being placed on manual ventilators before being transferred to hospital for further care. One person was ejected across Dr Pixley kaSeme Street. The man went into cardiac arrest and after unsuccessful CPR at the scene, he was declared dead. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Meanwhile, the driver of a heavy goods vehicle lost control of his vehicle on the N2 North bound lane before Mandeni, during the early hours of the morning. The truck plummeted down an 80m embankment before landing on its roof in dense vegetation.  
IPSS Medical Rescue's Paul Herbst said the driver sustained critical injuries and was severely entrapped within the cab of the truck. 

"The passenger was fortunate to escape with minor injuries. After the collision the passenger managed to climb the steep embankment and walked approximately 4km to the toll gate to call for emergency assistance," he said. 
Herbst said rescuers had to cut down trees and thick vegetation before the they could get to the truck. 
"While under the care of IPSS advanced life support paramedic, rescuers took three hours before the critically injured driver was freed from the wreckage using the jaws of life," he said. 
Both patients were transported to hospital by IPSS Medical Rescue. 
Shortly thereafter, in Etete, on the KwaZulu-Natal north coast, a vehicle crossing a railway line was struck by a goods train at the Etete railway crossing. 
"The car was dragged for approximately 60m before the train came to a stop. Unfortunately he sustained fatal injuries and was declared dead on arrival of IPSS paramedics," Herbst said. 
The Mercury