No deaths have been reported by the eThekwini Municipality following the violence that occurred at Moses Mabhida Stadium on Saturday night after Kaizer Chiefs lost 2-0 to Free State Stars in the Nedbank Cup semi-final.

The Moses Mabhida Stadium management confirmed in a statement on Sunday afternoon that a total of 18 men sustained injuries after spectators invaded the pitch to vent their frustration as the Amakhosi were knocked out of the cup.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Objects were thrown at the Kaizer Chiefs substitutes and coaching staff, including Steve Komphela, during the second half as the realisation hit home that their favourite team were going to lose.

But what happened at the final whistle was unprecedented as the spectators went on the rampage, breaking through a security cordon and running towards the Chiefs players and team management, while also attacking security guards.

Not even a police nyala armoured vehicle made any real impact, as the fans even stormed the tunnel later, where post-match TV interviews were disrupted.

SuperSport’s live broadcast was cut off as TV cameras were damaged and other equipment vandalised, while seats were ripped out and fires lit in the stands.
Violence erupted at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban as angry Kaizer Chiefs fans stormed the pitch and attacked Premier Soccer League security personnel and destroyed property, even burning seats in the stadium. Photo: Motshwari Mofokeng/ANA
“A total of 18 men suffered injuries during the pitch invasion. Twelve of the men were treated by medics at the stadium, and five men were taken to hospital where they were treated. All have since been discharged,” read the statement from the Moses Mabhida Stadium management.

Durban police confirmed to Independent Media on Sunday that two people were arrested, and it is expected that they will appear in court on Monday.

There have been reports of cars also being damaged around the ground, and the stadium management are still evaluating the impact of the incident.

“Costs are still being counted, but we confirm there is extensive damage to the stadium, including seating, crowd barriers and access gates as well as general vandalism,” said Vusi Mazibuko, the general manager for the Moses Mabhida Stadium.

“Five vehicles were also damaged in the media compound parking area. We will confirm within the next 48 hours the total sum of damages to the stadium and precinct.”

 @ashfakmohamed

 

IOL Sport
 Like us on Facebook

 Follow us on Twitter