Durban - Chaos broke out at the Pietermaritzburg City Hall yesterday while ANC secretary-general  was addressing party branches about tensions that might lead to the postponement of the provincial conAce Magashuleference.
Magashule was inside the hall addressing branch secretaries and chairpersons of the Moses Mabhida Region while disgruntled ANC activists aligned to President Cyril Ramaphosa were protesting outside. 

They were demanding to meet Magashule to make the call that all conferences should be postponed until after next year’s general elections.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Magashule and Ramaphosa were in Pietermaritzburg and Durban respectively yesterday, to assess the party’s state of readiness for conferences.

After about three hours of waiting outside, people wearing T-shirts with Ramaphosa’s face started insulting bodyguards who were preventing them from entering the hall.

One of the bodyguards retaliated by spraying pepper spray, which led to the angry crowd threatening to attack him with stones.

“If you throw a stone and it hits me I will fast-track your meeting with your creator right now. You throw a stone I shoot,” threatened the bodyguard.

Some people had also threatened to use their vehicles to block the road to prevent Magashule from leaving without meeting them. 

A meeting held in Howick three weeks ago attended by provincial and national leaders was cut short when Ramaphosa supporters tried to storm the venue but were stopped by gun-wielding bodyguards.

Ramaphosa supporters in KZN want all conferences to be postponed, while the provincial leaders and those from various regions want the meetings to sit next month.

Addressing the leaders of the branches at the city hall yesterday, Magashule said the ANC was in a “catch 22 situation” as it could not decide whether the conference should be held next month as divisions widen in the province.

“There was a suggestion that maybe we should focus on elections because conferences at times divide us, but we said the entire country should go to regional and provincial conferences by the end of May.

“Although the challenges are huge, other people are arguing that you cannot say we cannot go to conference when our mandate has long expired, and tomorrow you want to take us to court and say we are not within our mandate,” he said.

Moses Mabhida regional secretary Mzi Zuma said his region, where the current leadership term ended two months ago,was ready to hold its conference.

Threshold

“We have held 78 successful BGMs (branch general meetings) out of 88 branches, while our threshold is 62, which means we are far above the threshold,” he said.

However, Msawenkosi Mchunu, the leader of the disgruntled faction in the Moses Mabhida Region, said they were not happy with processes leading to the provincial conference. 

He alleged that the regional leadership had held BGMs without informing all members in good standing, and that police were used to prevent them from participating in other meetings. 

“We are saying the conference should not sit in this region. We should focus on building unity and cohesion. 

“We are saying what is the rush to hold the provincial conference, because there is chaos and fighting in all 11 regions as the ANC is divided,” Mchunu said.

“We should instead focus on election campaigns,” he said.

eThekwini regional secretary Bheki Ntuli said it was revealed at Ramaphosa’s meeting that most regions were ready to hold conferences.
The Mercury