Durban - What was meant to be a triumphant handover of a majority stake of a game reserve to a Kwa­Zulu-Natal community turned into chaos on Thursday after an angry mob disrupted the event, ­crying foul over bogus beneficiaries of their land restitution award.
The ceremony to hand over and launch the Mayibuye Game Reserve to the Kwa­Ximba community was hosted by the Department of Environmental Affairs, which injected R10million into the reserve near Pietermaritzburg. 

However, the disgruntled group said that at a meeting last week they were given an assurance by Deputy Minister Barbara Thomson that the launch would not go ahead until their grievances had been addressed. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

They stormed the event, demanding that it be stopped. 

After some heated exchanges outside, they walked into the marquee and initially sat down quietly as the programme went ahead. 

But minutes later, they interrupted proceedings, ­demanding to speak to Thomson. 

One of them stormed the stage and made for the microphone, but it was turned off so he could not have his say. 

Despite a strong police presence, the aggrieved group ­approached the deputy minister. One of them sat down next to her, and a heated conversation ensued. 

Mbongiswa Ngubane, a member of the group called the Mayi­buye Concerned Group, said their gripe was with some beneficiaries of the land restitution process being shut out. 

He also claimed people were being “bussed in”, and that others were misled into coming to the event as a show of the “bogus” KwaXimba community, in exchange for a meal. 

“There are people who came here as late as last year claiming they were beneficiaries. Decisions are being made without us. We have tried time and again to engage (the department), and for the community of KwaXimba to be consulted, but no one hears us. They do what they want with the land of our forefathers,” he said. 

According Sfiso Ndlovu, the acting chief director at the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights, the community was awarded 10000 hectares of land, of which about half is ­occupied by the reserve. 

“A legal entity was then created to hold the land on behalf of all the beneficiaries. On the business side, the game farm is doing well because it’s operated as a joint venture,” he said. 

The community held the majority stake of 51%, while other investors held the balance. One of the major problems was that the legal entity’s board of trustees had not changed for 15 years, meaning for three terms the same people had been making decisions, which had sparked the community’s ire. 

They had brought this up with Thomson at a meeting last week. 

“I gave them a platform, perhaps which I should not have given them. I went the extra mile. We were going to come here and hand over, but because we heard there were some issues, we put that on ice. 

“But there were certain things that were supposed to be met, in order for us not to proceed but they did not, hence we proceeded,” said Thomson. 

She said most of the issues in dispute were related to the land claim, so her department consulted with the land restitution commission, which confirmed that there were issues but said they should go ahead as these did not impact the ­reserve. 

With the department’s funding, a 45km wildlife fence was erected, a gate house and offices built, two houses refurbished into project offices and zebra and wildebeest brought in. 

The department said the project had “unlocked a further R100million private investment for the development of the eco-estate”. 

Also, 76 job opportunities were created and 15 people were trained and then employed as field rangers. 

Thomson met the aggrieved group later. 
The Mercury