Durban - The crackdown on some of the state-owned enterprises alleged to be havens of looting by the Guptas and their allies has begun in earnest.
On Monday, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan announced wholesale changes to the board of state-owned arms manufacturer Denel, which he said faced collapse unless urgent action was taken. Gordhan also warned that in the coming weeks the clean-up would be extended to more SOEs.

“I will be reviewing the composition of boards at other SOCs (state-owned companies) under the authority of the Department of Public Enterprises, as well as the executive management teams, to ensure that SOCs are set on a new path,” Gordhan said.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This comes days after President Cyril Ramaphosa ordered the Special Investigating Unit to probe allegations of graft at Transnet and power utility Eskom, where the Guptas were awarded lucrative coal contracts. 

Gordhan announced former Airports Company of SA chief executive Monhla Hlala as the new board chairperson, taking over from Daniel Mantsha, who resigned last month under a cloud after being implicated in state capture allegations. 

During his tenure as finance minister, Gordhan was embroiled in constant battles with the previous Denel board over Denel Asia, a controversial joint venture between the entity and VR Laser Asia - a company owned by Gupta associate Salim Essa. Gordhan yesterday slammed the entity’s previous leadership, blaming them for the deterioration at Denel. “The Denel Asia saga in 2016 deeply tarnished the Denel brand due to the insistence of the previous board to proceed with the venture, ­despite evidence showing it was a bad strategic move. Denel now faces the real threat of collapse unless far-reaching decisions are taken urgently,” Gordhan said.

Denel has previously battled to pay workers and suppliers on time due to liquidity challenges.

“The immediate priorities for the new interim board will be to restore sound corporate governance, review the effectiveness of the management team, review major contracts and review the company’s financial position with the view to creating sustainability,” Gordhan said.

Gordhan said the changes, which still need to be formally endorsed by the cabinet, were in line with Ramaphosa’s call for the restoration of financial position of SOEs to ensure that they fulfil their mandates.

Earlier this year, Ramaphosa announced drastic, similar changes at Eskom, where similar allegations of impropriety against board members and executive management have been reported, including looting and state capture.

“A number of SOCs have large government guarantees and their long-term viability is a concern. Capital markets have reduced lending to some because of serious governance concerns and the lack of credible reforms to boards and executive management,” Gordhan added.
The Mercury