Durban - The Metro Police have hit back at allegations that they held two paramedics against their will and acted illegally.
The claims were made after an apparent sting operation in Isipingo, south of Durban, where a fake crash scene was set up. 

While tensions ran high about who was in the wrong, police spokesperson, Captain Nqobile Gwala, confirmed that two people had been arrested. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Rescue Care Operations Director, Garrith Jamieson, issued a statement claiming that their para­medics had been held against their will, and an ambulance was searched without a permit. 

The joint operation was set up by the metro police and ­officials from the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa)

Responding to the allegations, Metro Police spokesperson, Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad, said they had yet to receive any official letter of complaint. 

He said the operation was conducted to establish which tow trucks and ambulance services were monitoring police radio channels and arriving at accident scenes when they had  not been called. 

According to Jamieson, his medics were informed of the crash scene by a tow truck driver. 

“When they arrived at the scene, they found that it had been staged,” he said. 

Calling the operation “unauthorised”, Jamieson claimed that a Rescue Care ­ambulance was searched without a warrant or reason. 

Kidnapped

“Our staff were ostensibly kidnapped, and had their phones taken from them. They were harassed and pilloried by metro police officers.

“It remains unclear to us exactly what these officials were searching for. Nothing illicit was found in our ambulance, and our staff were not charged, although they were waylaid for an extended period,” he said. 

He added that they had taken legal action and registered criminal cases against those involved. 

Commenting on the matter, Rescue Care’s attorney, Wesley Rogers of Jacques Botha & Associates, said the paramedics proceeded to the Durban Central police station, where they opened a case. 

“We have laid charges of contravention of section 28 of the criminal procedure act (unlawful search), kidnapping, unauthorised borrowing, ­cybercrime and crimen injuria,” he said. 

Rogers added that they had been told that there was a backlog of dockets that needed to be opened, so they had not yet received their crime administration system number. 

While nothing was taken from the Rescue Care ambulance, it is alleged that radios were confiscated from another privately run ambulance service. 

Illegal

Icasa spokesperson Paseka Maleka said that Icasa had been roped in as experts who would be able to identify any illegal radio communication or equipment. 

“Two illegal radios were found from the ambulance, and a case was opened by the metro police in terms of the Electronic Communications Act,” he said. 

According to Maleka, no persons are allowed to use any radio communication equipment or radio frequency ­without authorisation from Icasa. 

Meanwhile, a police officer has revealed how privately owned ambulance services sometimes arrived at scenes and bullied law enforcement officials. 

The policeman, who asked not to be named, said they were fed up with the abuse. 

“As they are private operators, the incentives are there to arrive at a crash scene first in order to ensure that those involved in the crash get into their vehicles,” the policeman said.

“This is irrespective of whether or not anyone was ­actually injured. 

“As long as you get into their vehicle, they get your details and can scam the Road Accident Fund. 

“You find that two or three different ambulances arrive immediately at the scene. This is because they have vehicles parked at strategic points so they can get to the scene fast,” he said. 

He added that this behaviour continued despite numerous calls and meetings with the police. 

“They are still defiant when it comes to the rules of the road concerning emergency vehicles,” he said. 

In November last year, two paramedics got into a physical brawl at an accident scene. 
The Mercury