Durban - Minister of Higher Education and Training Naledi Pandor says the government will cough up more money for the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS), including an additional R7.1billion to fund bursaries for poor and missing middle students.
Pandor made the announcement during a press briefing in Cape Town this week, where she outlined progress made so far in implementing free education.

The department, together with the NSFAS, were taken by surprise late last year when former president Jacob Zuma announced in December that higher education was to be free for students from poor and working-class families as of 2018.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Pandor said: “Additional government funding in 2018 of R7.1bn has been allocated to fund bursaries for children of poor and working-class families entering universities and TVET (Technical Vocational Education and Training) colleges, with R4.5bn set aside for qualifying university students and R2.6bn for TVET college students.”

She said the department would increase the baseline allocation to NSFAS to support poor and working-class university and TVET students from R9.8bn in the current financial year, to R35.3bn in 2020/21.

“This implies a need for improved efficiency and systems development at NSFAS. 

“We will allocate an additional R105million over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework to assist NSFAS increase and strengthen its administrative capacity,” said Pandor. She raised concerns over delays faced by students who were eligible for grants from the NSFAS, but had not yet been allocated funds. 

She said the department was dealing with the matter.

Students from universities across the country have expressed concerns that despite having been accepted by NSFAS and having signed the 
necessary documentation, they had not yet been allocated funds.

This scheme will expedite funding through an expanded bursary scheme, which has replaced the previous loan and partial bursary scheme.

Pandor said under the new scheme there would be preconditions to be satisfied.

“Although first-time entering students will not be expected to pay back the costs of their bursaries, they will be expected to meet certain conditions and expectations, including those relating to satisfactory academic performance conditions,” Pandor said.

The bursary is available to “poor and working-class South African students” from households with a gross combined annual income of R350000.

The department aims to fund 83000 students in 2018, while over 400000 potential students had applied for NSFAS funding this year.

Pandor has called for co-operation between institutions and NSFAS to ensure the ­successful implementation of the new scheme.

The DA’s spokersperson on higher education and training, Belinda Bozzoli, said Pandor had failed to deal with the issue of NSFAS allowances that had not been paid to students.

She said the party would ask for an urgent meeting with NSFAS on why thousands of students had reportedly not ­received allowances in months.
The Mercury