Durban - Tensions ran high on Tuesday as many South Africans and people across the world differed on the legacy of late Struggle icon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela who died on Monday.
While many praised her for her role in the Struggle against apartheid, some of her detractors were quick to point out her flaws with some of the comments threatening to spark racial tensions.

Speaking outside Madikizela-
Mandela’s home in Orlando, EFF leader Julius Malema vowed to defend Madikizela-Mandela from “racists”.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She died with her dignity intact and any assassination of her character was an attack on black people generally, he said.

“As a nation we have failed to defend her while she was still alive, I plead with the nation that we defend her now, so that we may always remember her as the Mother of the Nation. For you to be called a Mother of the Nation, you do not get elected. It is a position bestowed on you by the people because they see a mother in you. When you character assassinate Mama Winnie Mandela, you character assassinate the black people.”

Freedom Front Plus leader Pieter Groenewald said Malema’s statements were misplaced. “He is being mischievous and is being completely wrong. She (Madikizela-Mandela) was a controversial person because of the facts not because white people think so. For example, the necklacing remarks she made were controversial,” he said.  

However, Groenewald  said he understood that while Madikizela-Mandela wasn’t an icon for his party,  she would be an icon for her party, the ANC and her supporters.

Hitting out at Malema, Groenewald warned of rising racial tensions in the country, saying the country needed good and responsible leaders not those who fanned the fires.

Political commentator Bukani Mngoma said it was no surprise that Madikizela-Mandela would be resented by some. “She was a symbol of resistance against white dominance and racism. With the issue of racism having not been addressed in the country she is less likely to attract sympathy from a certain category of people, and in the South African context those are white people,” Mngoma said.

There was also a “cultural dimension” to the debate which played itself out on social networks, he said. 

“While there are some black people who do not like her, many are not likely to speak out and voice that because we tend to say that when a person has died there is no need to find fault and chastise them.”

Media organisations also came under the spotlight for their coverage of the Madikizela-Mandela’s death with Black First Land First (BLF) warning of a “co-ordinated attempt to discredit” her, even in death. 

“A carefully co-ordinated series of stories and lies will dominate the media to discredit this Struggle icon

“They will try to convince us that a black woman is to blame for the circumstances of apartheid. No white media should pass judgment and tell us about TRC commissions when land thieves and apartheid warlords are roaming the streets of Stellenbosch,” BLF said.

Poet Lebo Mashile lamented what she said was the mainstream Western media’s depiction of Madikizela-Mandela, saying such depiction should be a lesson to black women that they needed to be custodians of their own memory.

“Through racist and sexist eyes we will all either be monsters or invisible,” she said in response to a  Reuters news article entitled: “Winnie Mandela, ‘mother’ then ‘mugger’ of new South Africa, dies at 81”.

In an article published on its website, the UK’s Daily Mail referred to Madikizela-Mandela as a “the heroine of the anti-apartheid movement who became a ‘blood soaked bully’ who shamed 
Mandela.”

Author and journalist Charlene Smith was one of the people who came to Madikizela-Mandela’s 
defence. “If Madiba could forgive and honour her, and then not punish white South Africans for what we put her and others like her through, how dare you judge her?” she asked in a Facebook post.
The Mercury