Durban - Yaaay it’s May! Well, nearly! Time for two of my favourite music festivals which capture two vastly different experiences on the live music performance spectrum: Michaelhouse Festival of Music, boasting some great rock, choral, jazz and instrumental bands, choirs and soloists in a picturesque Midlands setting in mid-May, and Zakifo, which offers an incredible selection of really interesting cross-cultural music from around the globe at the end of May.
On the live music calendar they follow on from the increasingly excellent Easter-time Splashy Fen, and are sandwiched between two of the KZN Philharmonic’s World Symphony Seasons, allowing intense musical treats to punctuate the calendar year. 

Festivals are the live experience equivalent of mini-series TV binge-watching. My personal musical tastes mean that I may not necessarily choose to find and support a stand-alone concert of say hip-hop, dubstep or trap - but embedded within an overall weekend festival of various musical genres I welcome the exposure to artists whose music may not specifically resonate with me. With quality festivals offering carefully curated programmes, each act is fabulous, and the overall energy and vibe means that the whole is often greater than the sum of its very diverse parts. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Some of my most special musical memories are from previous Zakifo festivals. In 2015, at a packed-to-the-rafters Rainbow Restaurant, I watched mesmerised as astonishing Reunion singer/songwriter Nathalie Natiembe owned the stage with her distinctive blend of rock, funk, and traditional Creole music that defies genre and language boundaries. She accompanied herself by rubbing a scrunched-up plastic bag - which amazingly sounded like a whole percussion session. 

Her music, which seems to come from deep, deep within her, is heart-breakingly beautiful. And she is lovely. I found myself dancing alongside her while Brazilian bossa-nova ragga singer Flavia Coelho performed on stage. She was gracious, supportive and attentive to her fellow musician, so much so that her attitude and music have made me a fan for life. I am beyond trilled that Flavia Coelho and Nathalie Natiembe are back on the Zakifo bill this year. I can’t urge you strongly enough to see them. I am counting the sleeps

Mid-May sees us heading off to the Midlands for a weekend of beautiful music. There is an interesting mix of names on the bill this year at the Michaelhouse Festival of Music - Khan Morbee, PJ Powers, Freddie L and ByLwanstra to tempt the crowds.

Personally, I particularly enjoy the choral offerings, so am happy to spend a calm afternoon in the tranquil chapel. 

One doesn’t have to wait till mid-May at Michaelhouse to enjoy beautiful voices in sacred spaces. Durban Gospel Choir and friends will be performing a sundowner musical celebration tomorrow from 4pm, at the glorious Emmanuel Cathedral in Durban in a programme titled Songs of Hope and Freedom. The glorious Durban Gospel Choir will be joined by guest performances by Standard Bank Young Artist recipient Musa Hlatshwayo; Karen van Pletsen; multi-award-winning Durban actor Mpume Mthombeni; jazz diva Xolisa Roro Gqoli-Dlamini; the Glenwood Junior Primary school choir and composer Burton Naidoo.

And while contemplating beautiful musical experiences, last week I accompanied the KZN Philharmonic to Siphosethu Primary School in Ntuzuma. As I watched the pupils intuitively and visibly respond to a programme of accessible orchestral pieces, I was reminded of the universal power of music. 

One feels music - irrespective of language or world view. The Ntuzuma children sitting cross-legged in the schoolyard probably didn’t understand the nuances of orchestral music, but instinctively knew how to enjoy it.

How lucky are we to live in a province with so many musical opportunities in so many styles, languages and genres. There is a musical smorgasbord being offered over the next few weeks - it is up to us to head out and enjoy it!

For more info on these events, please drop me a line: illa@pubmat.co.za
The Mercury