Durban - From not having gone through a formal schooling system to bearing the title “Dr Ester Mahlangu” - that’s what her powerful talent has given this 81-year-old artist.
Mahlangu, an Ndebele artist and international icon, was honoured with an honorary doctorate by the University of Johannesburg (UJ) on Monday.

She said she was humbled by the gesture.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Being recognised at home is such a blessing. It shows that my people still see the great work that I do. It’s good to be honoured while I am still alive,” she said.

“I heard that they will be calling me doctor. I still can’t believe it. I didn’t go to school because during my  time there were no schools for black people in my area,” said Mahlangu, who grew up in Mthambothini, Middelburg.

She lives with her grandchildren and said one of her biggest dreams was to see them taking education ­seriously and doing what they love most. 

“It’s important for parents to allow their kids to do what they love. We need to support them in their dreams and ensure that they come true,” said 
Mahlangu. 

She began painting as a child at the age of 10 after being taught the art of Ndebele homestead wall painting and beadwork by her mother and grandmother.

Her work first won international attention in 1989 after her inclusion in the important exhibition Magiciens de la Terre at the ­Centre Pompidou in Paris.

In 1991, Mahlangu was the first woman to create artwork for a BMW, on a 525i sedan.

Last year Mahlangu was again commissioned by the BMW Group to put her unique artistic touch on a BMW 7 Series, and the ­vehicle was displayed at 
the Frieze Art Fair in London.

Simultaneously, the original BMW 525i art car was part of the exhibition South Africa: the art of a nation at the British ­Museum, highlighting Mahlangu’s key role in South African art.

Professor Federico Freschi, the executive dean of the faculty of art, design and architecture at UJ, said they decided to honour Mahlangu because of her legacy.

“With this honorary doctorate, we recognise Esther Mahlangu for her legacy as a cultural entrepreneur, skilfully negotiating local and global worlds, and as an educator. 

“Indeed, as a visionary individual she traverses what to others are insurmountable political barriers,” he said.

Freschi said Mahlangu was a living legend.
The Mercury