China's war on pollution is at
risk of reaching a "stalemate", with poor weather conditions
undermining the country's efforts to reduce smog, an environment
ministry spokesman said on Thursday.
Air pollution rose by more than a quarter in parts of
northern China in March, and the region has been hit by another
bout of smog in the second half of April, which the Ministry of
Ecology and Environment (MEE) has blamed on weak air
circulation.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"Weather conditions last month in Beijing were the worst
over the past six years with slow wind, little rain and high
temperatures, but average pollution readings were able to stay
at same level as the past five years," Liu Youbin, spokesman for
the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE), said at a regular
press briefing.
"The air pollution campaign has entered a stage of
stalemate, as Chairman Mao described in his famous book 'On
Protracted War'... The efforts we made have sometimes been
offset by unfavourable weather, and it will take time for us to
slip the leash of weather conditions to win the war," he added.
China met its 2013-2017 air quality targets after forcing
major polluters like steel mills and coal-fired power generators
to raise standards and upgrade their technology, and it also
shut down thousands of smaller law-breaking enterprises.
Liu said China shut down as many as 62,000 small-scale and
"dispersed" pollution sources in 2017, noting that they were
responsible for around 30 percent of total emissions of PM2.5,
small particles that lodge in the lungs.
But experts have warned that China's anti-smog campaign is
getting even harder, with improvements in air quality starting
to level off now that relatively straightforward programmes like
the desulphurisation of power plant emissions have been
completed.
While the focus has primarily been on reducing
concentrations of PM2.5, experts have also urged the authorities
to take action against other hazardous forms of air pollution
like ozone, which has been on the rise in northern China.
"The easy actions have been done very well but now there is
more that needs to be done," said Chen Songxi, an expert in
environmental statistics at the Guanghua School of Management at
Peking University.
"Motor vehicles in cities have to be curbed - so far, there
has been little action in that regard, because it will be very
unpopular with drivers," he added.