Durban - More than 11 years after a drunk Judge Nkola Motata - now retired - ploughed his gold Jaguar through the wall of a house in Joburg, he could become the first judge in the country to face impeachment.
If he is impeached he would lose his salary and benefits.

The Judicial Conduct Tribunal, which investigated complaints that Judge Motata should be found guilty of gross misconduct, has found against him and recommended to the Judicial Service Commission that the provisions of section 177 (1) (a) of the constitution be invoked - meaning he could face possible impeachment.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In a damning report, the tribunal found he had acted without integrity when he made racist 
remarks while under the influence of alcohol at the scene of the 
accident in January 2007.

“This tribunal has come to the conclusion that Judge Motata’s conduct at the scene of the accident and the remarks he made were racist and thus impinge on and are prejudicial to the impartiality and dignity of the courts,” the head of the tribunal, KwaZulu-Natal Judge President Achmat Jappie, said in his report.

He wrote: “Our constitution protects South African citizens against racism and guarantees their right to dignity. 

“Our judges are custodians of these rights... Racist conduct on the part of a judge therefore strikes at the heart of judicial integrity and impartiality, particularly against the background of South Africa’s apartheid history... and constitutes gross misconduct...

“The question to be asked is, if Judge Motata is to retain the office of a judicial officer, would this negatively affect the public confidence in the justice system? If the answer is in the affirmative, as we suggest it is, then... we recommend that the provisions of section 177(1) (a) of the constitution be invoked.”

The tribunal said in its recommendations that the office of a judge was a very respectable one.

“A judge’s conduct, in and out of court, should not dishonour that high office. Impeccable moral and ethical standing is a crucial hallmark of such a public office...

“A question to be asked is what would be the attitude of an ordinary person, let alone a person of Afrikaner descent, if she/he is to be tried before Judge Motata,” said Judge Jappie.

The tribunal sat in January and heard submissions following complaints levelled against him by
AfriForum. The organisation claimed that Motata made racist remarks to Richard Baird, the owner of the house into whose wall he had crashed in January 2007.

It was found that Judge Motata was driving under the influence at the time. He told Baird at the scene that “No boer is going to undermine me... This used to be the white man’s land, but it is not anymore.” 

He was fined R20000 for driving under the influence.

Judge Motata told the tribunal he did not regard himself as drunk and had had only two glasses of wine to drink before the incident, which placed him under the limit.

He also denied making racial slurs, saying “boer” was a “neutral” word. 

Judge Jappie said it was “patent from the trial record that the utterances made by the judge were replete with vulgarity”. 

The wheels of justice have been grinding especially slowly in the case of Judge Motata, who had launched numerous constitutional challenges and other applications in an attempt to avoid possible impeachment. The Judicial Service Commission now has to consider the recommendations and then report to the National Assembly.

A judge can only be removed from office by the president following a two-thirds majority vote by the National Assembly.
The Mercury