Durban - It has been a long road for singer and songwriter, Museeq IQ. He first gained prominence eight years ago when he was featured on DJ Sndara’s hit song, Lalala. Since then, he has worked with the likes of DJ Tira and Zakes Bantwini, and late last year he released his debut album. The musician said that The Music Vault 8.0 is the final version of music he had been working on since 2009.
“When I started working on this album I was still working as a sales executive and my initial plan was to release the album in 2010 or 2011 but then we were hit by a recession, and I was retrenched. Even though I was making music everyday, I decided to hold off with the release of the album,” he said. 

The 35-year-old from KwaMashu in Durban, whose real name is Siphiwe Khumalo, said that he wanted to create a sound that resonated with deep house music lovers. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Deep house is a very unique genre, one that I really love, so I wanted this album and the sound of it to resonate with people who enjoy the genre. There is a song for every mood, from Sunday to Sunday you will find something for you. It's also a dance album and I think that dance describes South Africa, we are a dancing nation. I really feel like I've outdone myself with every aspect on this album but, of course, there is always room for improvement,” he said. 

Although he describes it as a dance album, he said that many genres were influential in the album's final product. “There is an RnB and neo-soul influence, old school soul also influenced me a lot because that is what I grew up listening to as my father loved that kind of music. There is also a bit of jazz and samba, 'The Music Vault 8.0' encompasses a worldly sound.” 

And what he thinks he could improve on, he said: “Enhancing the sound, the quality of samples and sound loops. I want to improve my music to an international standard and become known for my dance hits. I would also love to work with more artists and I think that is how you improve yourself as well. What I always want to improve on is my song writing as well,” said Museeq. 

He said one of his favourite songs on the album was Brand New. “It's my favourite song for a number of reasons, but mainly because it is a song that pays homage to my father. He loves old school music and I sampled an old school song and made it a house song, with some hip hop influence. Another one of my favourites is Moya, it is sung in Zulu, the only Zulu song on the album and it describes my mother,” said Museeq. 

Putting his debut album together was a huge learning curve but the lessons he learnt were more about life then music.

“This process taught me that it is okay to outgrow relationships and friendships, and it is okay to let go of some memories. Actually, sometimes you have to let go but allow yourself to do so gracefully. It also made me emotionally aware of things around me and I realised that you have to be spiritually right to release the right kind of music,” he added.  

After releasing this album, Museeq also made a big move and relocated to Johannesburg. “Durban is great but I needed to be at the epicentre of where everything happens in music, especially since it is my full-time career now. 

"If you want to be a Hollywood actor you have to go to Hollywood, so it was important for me to make that move and I don't regret it at all. Now I am focusing on growing my music and performing,” he said. 
The Mercury