Durban - Security measures at the multimillion rand Moses Mabhida stadium are being reviewed as the facility grapples with improving security following the R2.6million worth of damage caused by angry fans on Saturday night.
The management of the stadium has admitted the design of the venue made it easier for angry fans to invade the pitch after the Nedbank Cup semi-final.

Broadcasting equipment and other private property including cars parked on the road were damaged and those costs were not included in the figure released this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is correct that it is easy to invade the pitch and there are three reasons why. The first is that the design allows for the pitch to be an assembly point in the event there is an incident (which may require evacuation). 

“The second reason is that the stadium is designed to maximise spectator experience, and thirdly because this is not a stadium used solely for soccer but for other events as well,” said stadium general manager Vusi Mazibuko yesterday.

Mayor Zandile Gumede said claims for the R2.6m damages were being initiated with insurance companies. 

“We have a long list of damaged items or property which includes the pitch, goalposts, speed fencing, crowd-management barriers, bins, water points, dinner plates, glasses, chairs, tables and many others,” said Gumede.

Mazibuko admitted that other security measures at the stadium on the day proved to be a failure including a long orange plastic net, which security guards hold up just before the end of the match when they anticipate pitch invasions. 

However, the net was torn into pieces and set alight by angry fans.

The city council said its partnership with Kaizer Chiefs would continue despite the incident. 

According to the agreement, Chiefs had to bring at least two Premier Soccer League matches and two knock-out games to Moses Mabhida every season. 

“We said to Chiefs we want to have your matches but we do not want to pay you. We said to them we want to have a share in ticket sales,” Mazibuko said.

The stadium costs are incurred by the stadium while in turn the stadium pockets all the proceeds from the sale of the first 22000 tickets. Anything above that is split with 60% going to the stadium and 40% going to the club.
The Mercury