Moving into a new home post marriage can be extremely exciting and fun. From the wall colours, finishes, furnishings and art pieces, the couple may have certain ideas for decorating the home. The best way to decorate your abode is to think about all the things that make the two of you feel comfortable individually and as a couple, say experts.

Mikita Laad Gupta, senior designer at Bonito Designs and Meghna Menon, interior expert of UrbanClap.com list tips that you can choose from to accentuate the look of your home and bring in the ‘wow' factor:ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


 Customized personal wall: Make your home stylish with a personalized decorative wall. Ensure that you do not overdo your walls or leave them completely blank. Create your own collection of custom signs, contemporary photo canvasses, wood plaques, personalized canvas prints, slate signs and classic wall hangings. 


You can transform your photos into genuine works of art with personalized wall art. All the pre-wedding and post wedding photos and family photos of different shapes and sizes can be hung up and turned into a stunning photo wall. In this way you can relive those amazing memories you have created with your partner and family every day!


Personalized crockery: How about accessorizing your tabletop with quirky crockery made of funky prints or photographs? Customized crockery is a trend that is picking up amongst couples. 


Apart from giving a quirky look to the house, personalized crockery with photo prints on mugs, plates and glasses is the perfect way to show that special someone they mean the world to you. Sip your favourite coffee or green tea in these stunning looking mugs. Isn't it a fantastic way to remember a beautiful past while cherishing an even better present?


Character furniture: Choosing the right furnishings for all the rooms can be an overwhelming task for couples. However, picking the right pieces can make your home look spacious and be the focal point of your abode. While the two of you definitely want to invest in pieces that are durable, ensure they make for a beautiful addition into your home interior.


Apart from the basic requirements like a bed or a dining table, choose accent furniture which reflects your personality as a couple. If you both love reading, for instance, how about setting up a beautiful loveseat near a window where you can both curl up and read on weekends? Choose vibrant or subtle colours and some real interesting throw pillows to match the décor and the tone for the rest of the room.