Durban - DA leader, Mmusi Maimane, has strengthened his grip on power after he and his supporters won the debate over diversity in the leadership ranks of the organisation.
On Sunday, Maimane, who was elected unopposed for ­another term, described the adoption of the diversity clause into the party’s constitution as a great stride forward that would make the official opposition more representative and welcoming.

The party concluded its two-day federal congress in Pretoria during which Maimane was re-elected unopposed, and Nelson Mandela Bay Mayor Athol Trollip won a hotly contested race against Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga for the position of DA federal chairperson. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The conference, which was the biggest in the party’s history, also saw the adoption of a recall clause, paving the way for the expulsion of Patricia de Lille as Cape Town’s mayor. 

De Lille is being hauled ­before a disciplinary hearing by the DA following allegations of unduly influencing the ­appointment of staff in the city, failure to exercise her ­duties in terms of the ­Financial Management Act and other laws, and the abuse of power.

De Lille has described the allegations against her as “trumped up” and an elaborate attempt to remove her from office, and vowed to fight to clear her name.

In the lead-up to the federal congress, the debate around the diversity clause and proposed amendments divided the party, with the so-called black caucus saying the party’s composition of public representatives and staff complement did not reflect the country’s demographics in terms of race and gender.

Those critical of the contents of the diversity clause ­accused the black caucus of “racial solidarity”, pointing out that sections of the amendments were bordering on introducing quotas.

Maimane has repeatedly reiterated his opposition to quotas, but stressing that he had a responsibility to ensure diversity within the party.

The amendments to the clause had helped strengthen it, Maimane said.

The new diversity clause said South Africa was a richly diverse society and that its people came from different ­origins, worshipped in different ways and had different cultures and customs, and that they were all unique.

But the party suffered a setback on the gender question, with only one woman voted into its top leadership structure. Of the six positions voted for at the congress, national spokesperson Refiloe Ntseke was the last of the three federal deputy chairpersons. 

Maimane agreed that women were under-repre­sented in most leadership roles.

“Make no mistake, I have a genuine interest in making sure that there are women in our structures and in all leadership places. But I actually think we can’t be dismissive of the fact that in the provinces we have seen the election of great female leaders,” he said.

He added that he could not set a threshold for female representation in the party even though he wanted more women in leadership roles.

“I can’t because I don’t ­believe in quotas. We fix it by going out and attracting more females into politics. I really believe that on this particular issue more can be done, and I urge all of us to continue to do that. But the democratic process that I uphold has delivered this particular outcome.

Ntseke said she was not disappointed that she was the only woman voted into the DA’s national leadership.

“I don’t necessarily think we must now practice quotas and say people must vote on particular gender issues or ­select other black people. I think people must say these are the leaders we want to elect. It doesn’t bother me that I am the only female on the leadership panel.

“I think when you look at the diversity in the room and the people who actually elect, I am very comfortable that I am chosen by blacks, whites and Indians to serve as one of the leaders of the organisation,” Ntseke said.

The congress also rejected the proposal to extend Maimane’s term of office from three to five years.
The Mercury