Durban - A DA councillor who recently spoke out against the construction of a mayoral house by the city of uMhlathuze is to be investigated and possibly charged for misconduct over his utterances. However, his party yesterday vowed to challenge any such move.
Last week, The Mercury reported that DA councillor Christo Botha had alleged that the city of uMhlathuze in Richards Bay was building a mayoral house which was set to cost ratepayers about R20 million.

This was later disputed by the municipality which, while conceding that indeed an
official mayoral guest house
was being built, said only R5.5m had been set aside for the project. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The city also said the land on which the house was being built  was owned by the municipality and thus would not cost a cent.

The city had also disputed claims that the construction had not been approved by the council, adding that the house would be used to host official delegations to the city, including investors.

Chief whip at the uMhlathuze council Mannie Laurens announced that the council had resolved to investigate allegations of misconduct and a breach of the councillors' code of ethics against Botha. It is understood that the DA, EFF and IFP had opposed the move during a full council meeting.

The council had instructed the municipal manager to investigate the claims against Botha. In his statement, Botha also claimed the municipality was cash-strapped, an allegation also disputed by the municipality.

Laurens said the comments by Botha were skewed and malicious. 

“According to the standing rules of order, the chief whip is the custodian of discipline in the council and will take the lead on councillor Botha’s investigation and all other processes to follow if there is materialistic evidence of misconduct.”

But the DA has vowed not to take this lying down, saying it was even prepared to go to court should Botha be charged.

The leader of the DA in KwaZulu-Natal, Zwakele Mncwango said the move by the ANC-led council was a ploy by the ruling party to intimidate the opposition.

“Clearly they do not know what the role of the opposition is. Such threats are a direct attack on our democracy and constitution.”

Mncwango said the provincial leadership of the DA was fully behind Botha and would fight the charges should they be brought against him.

“Clearly the intention is to try and silence councillors. I am just waiting for them to make the first move,” Mncwango said.

Botha accused the ANC members of council of not being transparent on the matter of the mayoral house. 

“The municipality has been flip-flopping in its response - the one day it is a residence for the mayor and the next day it is a 'guest house fit for kings and queens'. A lack of transparency is the reason why we are at this juncture.”
The Mercury