Durban - The State Information Technology Agency (Sita) has accused a supplier of using ­malicious software in an ­attempt to sabotage IT software that could have crippled police forensic systems.
Sita spokesperson, Sithembele Senti, said that malware had been found, but this did not render it impossible for the SAPS to use the system.

The supplier of the critical IT systems, Keith Keating of Forensic Data Analysts (FDA), has denied using malicious software to sabotage the police systems.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Sita and Keating are embroiled in a bitter dispute over the payment of R70million. Last week Keating switched off the systems and demanded payment.

Keating, a former police officer turned businessman, shut down the Property Control and Exhibit Management (PCEM) and Firearm Permit System (FPS) within the SAPS last Wednesday. This hampered the police’s capacity to handle ­forensic evidence, firearm controls and their ability to do ­in-depth investigations.

“Yes, we did find malware. This malware could have ­destroyed the system had it not been spotted in time. We managed to remove it,” Senti said. 

Keating said they switched off their systems but did not install malware.

“We have served the ­police for 20 years and we would never do that to them. They (Sita) must come with an affidavit, and not just make these claims.”

Keating claims that Sita and the SAPS owe his company more than R70m for services rendered since December.

Keating and FDA entered the spotlight when he was ­accused of bribing former acting police commissioner Khomotso Phahlane to gain police contracts. 

The allegations were laid bare by the DA’s Tim Brauteseth during a standing committee on public accounts meeting held last year.

Senti said they had been in the process of approaching the courts to force FDA to switch the systems back on, but Sita technicians had found a way to start the systems again.

“The systems are now running as normal, but our technicians are working on a permanent solution. Keating can take us to court to prove his allegations but we have a perpetual usage right to use these systems,” Senti said.

Police spokesperson, Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo, said he could not comment fully on the matter as the contract was between Sita and FDA, and the SAPS were only the users of the software.

Keating accused Sita and the SAPS of going behind his back and ‘illegally’ reactivating the services on Monday, saying he would file papers at the high court next week.

Keating said the police had the right to switch on the systems for which they had licences, “and that would be the older versions of the systems, and not the current version they are using”.

“So far, we have had no discussion with the SAPS or Sita, and they are not willing to sit down like adults and discuss a way forward. There has been no payment and no resolution. We are not here to harm the police or the citizens. We just want to be paid for services that were rendered,” Keating said.

Irregularities

Senti said they were dealing with the issue of payment in a separate court battle, arguing that there were irregularities in FDA’s invoices.

Speaking on Thursday, Brauteseth issued a stern warning to Keating regarding his accusation that Scopa instructed SAPS and Sita to stop payments to FDA.

Johan Burger, an Institute of Security Studies consultant, said the agreement between Keating and the SAPS could have a negative impact on the public. 

“All kinds of services may be affected by the shutdown of these services,” he said. 

Burger said this could severely affect the forensic services and also the firearms register.

“If it were to be shut down this would affect all of us, one way or another,” he said.

He added that any officials implicated in this should face serious consequences.

“When you enter into an agreement such as this - based on questionable ethical grounds - then you put yourself at risk as a government department. 

“The officials should face the consequences of putting those services at risk.”
The Mercury