Durban - Four Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges under the Ilembe-Umfolozi area management have shut down following student protests over delays in disbursing their “much-needed” financial aid.
Chief Albert Luthuli, Sundumbili, Sithebe and Mandeni colleges have all been closed. 

The Mercury understands that Esikha-
wini is likely to join the protest by Monday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Almost four months into the academic year, students have not received their financial aid disbursed through the National Student Financial Aid Scheme.

Students at Chief Albert Luthuli College in KwaDukuza said they had been kicked out of rented accommodation because they did not have the funds to pay the rent.

The Mercury visited the college this week and found it almost abandoned by both the management and the students.

Nkanyiso Nxumalo, a leader of the students’ representatives council, and the SA Students’ Congress at the institutions said a meeting with leaders of the colleges had not yielded results.

“We want the national minister of the Department of Higher Education and Training to come and help us address this issue because the students at these institutions are suffering.

“As part of our strategy we have started a defiance campaign where students who have been evicted from rooms because they could not pay rent, will continue sleeping in classrooms.” 

He said students had been sleeping in classrooms at Chief Albert Luthuli and the college management called police to evict the students. However, students at Mandeni campus were still sleeping in the classrooms because they had nowhere to stay.

Nxumalo said that since last year, students had suffered because of financial aid problems. 

“We will boycott classes until June if need be, until this matter is resolved. There are about 400 students that are struggling with nowhere to stay.”

Principal of the four colleges, Sam Zungu, said yesterday he would be releasing a statement on the matter. However, no statement had been received at the time of publication. 

Attempts to obtain for comment from the Department of Higher Education and Training were unsuccessful at the time of publishing.
The Mercury