Durban - The ANC top brass has called on President Cyril Ramaphosa to deal with allegations of rampant corruption in the North West province as calls for Premier Supra Mahumapelo to quit intensified.
On Monday, the SACP in the province questioned the herd of cattle that ­Mahumapelo is reported to have given former President Jacob Zuma.

Violent protests broke out in Mahikeng last week as residents called for Mahumapelo’s head, following a string of corruption allegations against him, forcing Ramaphosa to hold emergency talks with ANC structures and alliance partners - Cosatu and the SACP.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mahumapelo has been linked to a series of corruption allegations in various departments, including health and agriculture, which has pitted him against Cosatu and the SACP leadership in the province over the years.

ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule on Monday said while the ruling party was still busy looking at a political solution to the problems plaguing the province, Ramaphosa was given the green light to deal with governance-related complaints around Mahumapelo’s 
administration.

“We have mandated the president to deal with governance issues and the ANC is continuing to deal with organisation challenges and issues. Very soon you will get the report,” he said.

Following further allegations at the weekend that Mahumapelo had used R1.5million of public funds to buy Zuma 25 cows - money that was meant for the upliftment of black emerging farmers - Cosatu said the federation was losing patience with Mahumapelo.

Cosatu provincial secretary Job Dliso said the federation had highlighted to Ramaphosa and the ANC top brass that corruption had spread across all spheres of government in the province.

“We have made it clear to president Ramaphosa that we cannot continue with the levels of corruption here in the province under the premier. We have been calling for investigations on some of these allegations but there has been no action,” he said.

Mahumapelo’s spokesperson Brian Setswambung  said he viewed the allegations that he gifted Zuma with cows bought with public funds as part of a political witch hunt against him.

“The premier denies the allegations and views them as part of an effort to tarnish his image and standing in society. The issue referred to is a direct responsibility of a department and the premier, as a politician, is not involved in procurement matters,” Setswambung said.

Mahumapelo, however, appeared to be contradicting himself hours later, when he said the cows saga happened during an election campaign.

Speaking to eNCA, Mahumapelo said the North West ANC officials had resolved to take organisational ownership of the saga instead.

He said he would not voluntarily resign from his post despite the increasing pressure, including a pending motion of no-confidence by the EFF, which is backed by the DA and some members of the ANC in the provincial legislature.
The Mercury