Durban - Nothing can describe the feeling I am feeling at the moment,” was the reaction from a delighted Ndodomzi Ntutu after he had clinched a gold medal at the Commonwealth Games on Thursday
“I tried to run as fast as I can, but winning the gold medal - nothing can describe what I am feeling at the moment.

“I am sure it will hit me even harder when I get home.”ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The visually impaired duo of Ntutu and Hilton Langenhoven earned another 100m gold-silver double for South Africa.

Ntutu was in fine form, dashing over the line in first place with a time of 11.02, with Langenhoven following in second place with a season’s best of 11.27.

The sprinting stars followed in the footsteps of Akani Simbine and Henricho Bruintjies, who gave South Africa its first 1-2 finish in the 100m sprint event on Monday.

Ntutu said that although they did not consciously decide to emulate Simbine and Bruintjies, they had targeted medals in their race.

“In terms of coming one and two or getting into the medals, they inspired us and we were giving it our all and running hard to get gold and silver,” said Ntutu,

Meanwhile, Caster Se­menya marched on to today’s two-lap final and is on target to claim the rare 800-1500m double at the Games after winning her heat in 1:59.26.

Semenya looks almost certain to become only the third women to win the double at the quadrennial showpiece.

The 800m final is at 12.45pm today, South African time.

Hard-working one-lap hurdler Wenda Nel was finally rewarded for her years of perseverance winning the bronze medal.

Nel took it out fast in the 400m hurdles final, but lost steam as she approached the second-last hurdle, but hung on for third place with a time of 54.96 seconds.

Jamaican Janieve Russell surged over the home straight, crossing the line in 54.33, with Eilidh Doyle bagging silver in 54.80.

“I just raced for that line and I didn’t immediately know if I was on the podium until I saw the result,” Nel said. I went out very hard - that was the plan, I wanted to push my body and see what I was capable of.”

Nel said she stumbled over her final hurdle, but was delighted to be able to sufficiently keep her composure and deliver the goods.

South Africa’s hopes of another sprint medal in the 200m came to nothing with national half-lap record-­holder Clarence Munyai finishing his race in fourth place, complaining of an injury he sustained in his semi-final the day before.

Munyai finished in a creditable fourth place in his first final at major senior championships, after initially crossing the line in fifth place with a time of 20.58.

He got bumped up to fourth place after England’s Zharnel Hughes was disqualified for a lane infringement.

“I have a hamstring problem from yesterday’s semi-final and today I thought it would hold, but going into the home straight I pulled up because I knew I wouldn’t be able to keep up with these guys,” Munyai said.

Munyai’s injury will be a major blow to South Africa’s 4x100m relay team, with Bruintjies, Emile Erasmus, Simbine, Anaso Jobodwana, and Antonio Alkana left to get the job done.

Jobodwana’s name was initially pencilled in for the 200m final, but he was later disqualified.

He false started when he recorded a reaction time less than 0.100 seconds and instead of being shown the red card, the referee flashed the green warning sign allowing him to get back into the blocks.

The South African team sent out a media release yesterday saying that it had filed an appeal, but the decision was upheld.

“Team South Africa has accepted the official decision to disqualify 200m athlete Anaso Jobodwana from the semi-finals of the event on Wednesday evening,” the statement read.

“However, Team South Africa have advised that they will be requesting that the relevant federation, in this case, Athletics South Africa, take the matter up with the international body, the IAAF.
The Mercury