Durban - More than 1000 SA Federation of Trade ­Unions (Saftu) members marched in Durban on Wednesday against the introduction of a national minimum wage.
Saftu and the National Union of Metalworkers of SA (Numsa) held marches in the major cities across the country.

In Durban, the members marched from King Dinuzulu Park to the city hall through Dr Pixley KaSeme (West) Street.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Shops along the route closed for the duration of the march but ­reopened later. 

However, businesses in Durban and Pietermaritzburg did not ­report significant absenteeism.

Durban Chamber of Commerce chief marketing officer Taweni Gondwe Xaba said businesses in Durban did not report disruptions. 

“The CBD reported that business was proceeding as usual and there was no absenteeism as a result of the protest action,” she said. 

Pietermaritzburg Chamber of Business chief executive Melanie Veness said it was business as usual in the city except for some absenteeism, which was due to ­employees who had gone to Durban to participate in the march. 

“Some intimidation was reported in Camperdown, but other than that there was nothing,” she said. 

Economist Bonke Dumisa said although the marches were well ­attended in Gauteng, it did not have a significant negative effect on the economy.

At the Durban march, workers mocked former president Jacob Zuma, singing: “Jacob Zuma siyabuza ubani owabulala abasenzi eMarikana?” (Jacob Zuma we are asking who killed workers in ­Marikana?)

Workers also scorned President Cyril Ramaphosa for agreeing to the R20 per hour minimum wage.

Some vulgar songs were ­directed at Cosatu president Sdumo Dlamini, but Numsa Kwa­Zulu-­Natal secretary Mbuso ­Ngubane, who led the march, said Saftu would still negotiate with ­Cosatu to “bring them into the fight for workers”.

“It is unfortunate they are not here; maybe they are feeling ­embarrassed because they were party to the decision at the level of Nedlac of agreeing with the ­national minimum wage as it is.”

Saftu is demanding a R12500 minimum wage for all workers in the country, and that Parliament allows for more time for ­debate on the Minimum Wage Bill and amendments to the labour laws. 

Workers described the proposed minimum wage of R20 an hour as an insult.

The workers sang and toyi-toyed under the watchful eye of police as they made their way to the city hall. They said they were walking slowly so that “business could feel” their presence.

But the strike went without incident with Saftu and Numsa marshals ensuring that there was order. Ngubane said they were ­satisfied with the turn out. 

“We have been trying to hire buses but drivers are not at work, they are fighting for their wage increment. We could only secure a few buses for today.”  

The deputy secretary of Saftu, 
Moleko Phakedi, handed over the memorandum of demands to 
Mlungisi Ntombela from the ­mayor’s office. 

At the march in Johannesburg, the general secretary of Saftu, Zwelinzima Vavi, said its members may camp at government departments if their demands for the scrapping of changes to the labour laws were not met.  

“We will camp for two days. We are going to take the buses and 
put them here. We are going to take the trains and taxis and come here. We will not leave the town until our rights are guaranteed,” said Vavi. 

“Already the laws in this country tell us that when we picket we should be 100m away from the place of employment,” he said, to loud cheers from members. 

He also did not spare Ramaphosa and called him, along 
with federations Cosatu and ­Fedusa, “sellouts” for signing the 
deal for a national minimum 
wage, as well as  changes to the 
labour laws. 
The Mercury