Durban - When Justin Raleigh and his friends started a weekly chicken peri-peri “book-club” style gathering every Friday night, he had no idea his passion for hot Portuguese dishes would ignite his entrepreneurial passion.
Not that Raleigh, 42, a qualified graphic designer, was a novice when it came to business start-ups - he had run several businesses to varying degrees of success over the years. But most of these revolved around selling his graphic design skills.

Raleigh and his wife, Sophia, 46, now run a small peri-peri sauce manufacturing factory, Delagoa Bay, in the trendy Station Drive precinct off Umgeni Road.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

They produce about 4000 bottles of their international, award-
winning sauce for distribution every month in restaurants and delis across the country with a strong footprint in Johannesburg and Cape Town.

Raleigh matriculated from Pieter-
maritzburg College in 1993 and after travelling abroad, working in various jobs, he completed a graphic design diploma at Mediatek before working as a lecturer and then landing a job at a local advertising agency.

Raleigh decided working for a boss was not what he wanted to do for the rest of his life, and quit to start his own small design agency, Flashlight. He eventually shut that business and opened Pyromedia to focus on hosting websites as well as graphic design. Pyromedia picked up MTN as a client and Raleigh and another designer created an app for the MTN Golden Arrows - a loyalty pod designed to get bums in seats at football matches.

“Based on that, I had an opportunity with the Sharks in 2013 and created an app called Sharks Frenzy, which rewarded game-day fans by giving them instant freebies or prizes from about 100 restaurants around Durban and then they could win bigger prizes on game day,” he said.

“I built it with our team and our money - it was ahead of its time.” 

But there were technical issues that had to be resolved and Raleigh collaborated with a US firm to develop a fix. But the US firm folded and Raleigh and his investors ran out of funds to complete a further app concept. That’s when Raleigh hit what he calls “the reboot” to find another hot business idea.

“It was hectic. My parents said: ‘Pack up everything and come back home’, and at 40 years old, I came back home. The fortunate thing was that thanks to them, our overheads were almost zero, we contributed to the food, but we started out like a 20-year-old,” Raleigh said.

Only, he had moved back home with his wife and son.

“We were looking for something to do and one thing I was passionate about was peri-peri. We used to have a peri-peri book club and get together on Friday nights. I had a Portuguese friend who was a chef in Ballito and we collaborated to come up with Delagoa Bay sauce.”

The couple started making the gluten-, preservative-, sugar- and alcohol-free sauce with quality ingredients at home in his parents’ kitchen. They aimed to target the higher end of the market and differentiated the brand with its traditional Portuguese-look branding and upmarket pricing.

“We started with two products - an oil-based and a butter-based sauce - and we made 20 bottles,” Raleigh said. “Sophia literally went with a red-riding-hood basket with samples of our sauces from restaurant to restaurant getting them to try it.”

Ordered

“The first restaurant to buy the sauce was Circus Circus in Musgrave Centre. They ordered 12 bottles straight away, so I went to the beach branch and they took 12,” Sophia recalled.

The restaurant business was slow, so the couple decided to launch their product at local markets. The sauce was an instant hit. They sold 100 bottles on their first day at uMhlanga Wonder Market. They expanded to the I Heart Market, the Shongweni Farmers Market and others.

Taking a loan from family, after just two months of being in business, they paid for a stand at Decorex in Durban and sold 600 bottles.

“Justin would take the takings from the day and go and work through the night to make more stock,” Sophia said.

“That was when we knew we had a business and that’s when we realised we needed to do more markets and shows,” Raleigh said.

“At every show and market we did, we met potential distributors and restaurant owners.” 

Raleigh put a zapper QR code on the bottle as a marketing tool to allow people to re-order sauce instantly from home, and if a friend was visiting and they liked it, they could simply scan and order two bottles. But with the high cost of shipping, this was done at a loss and the campaign had to come to an end, although it achieved the result of growing the brand.

Within the first six months of launching the product, a distributor was supplying the sauce to at least 30 businesses in KwaZulu-Natal  and before long, the couple had established an agent in Cape Town and distributors in Port Elizabeth and Johannesburg.

“We grew a bit too big for my parents’ home and shifted manufacturing to an outbuilding at their home and then moved to Station Drive in June 2017,” Raleigh said.

Raleigh’s sauce scooped a gold star in the Great Taste 2017 Award in the UK, after a British distributor asked if he could enter it into the event. But rapid growth and awards aside, a major highlight of Raleigh’s business journey has been working with his wife.

“Sophia has never been an entrepreneur and I have never been anything but an entrepreneur. She had to learn everything about running a business and then there was the idea of starting something from nothing. At first I thought it would be impossible, but it has been brilliant.” 

And the couple says the sauce has travelled as far as Germany and Australia where people have taken it for family and friends to try out.

“We are running this as a tight ship for now, but when there is surplus, we will look at exporting. In the two years we have been doing this, the chilli/peri-peri market has gotten much bigger.”
The Mercury