Parliament wants North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo and Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba to be among the witnesses to testify before the inquiry into the naturalisation of the Guptas.
Home Affairs Department director-general Mkuseli Apleni was also named by the lawmakers as a potential witness for providing conflicting statements to the portfolio committee.

Parliament’s home affairs portfolio committee deliberated on the terms of reference for the long-awaited inquiry.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The inquiry will now probe all the Gupta family members who were naturalised, and it has been broadened to examine any information it comes across.

Gigaba waived naturalisation requirements for some Gupta family members in 2015 when they appealed to him after the department turned down their initial application.

He cited the family’s ­exceptional circumstances in the form of their R25billion investment, the creation of 7000 “permanent and decent” jobs and R1million donation to 75 schools in North West.

Investigations

The committee heard that investigations were already under way as part of phase one of the inquiry.

The investigations included interviews with North West ­Education Department officials, and principals of schools the Guptas made donations and site visits to.

Documents that were used by the department to grant naturalisation to some of the Gupta family members in 2015 were also verified.

During the committee’s discussion, some MPs wanted to discuss potential witnesses.

The ANC’s David Kekana said Gigaba was the obvious choice as the matter rested with his office.

“I think he is to be a key witness on the matter. He is the one who overturned the decision of the adjudication committee,” Kekana said.

“He will be the first person to be called here, and we must get all the records of the meetings he held with the Guptas. The director-general must also be called because he gave contradictory statements,” he said.

The EFF’s Hlengiwe Hlophe-Mkhaliphi agreed that ­Gigaba had made contradic­tory statements about the
Guptas.

The ANC’s Hlomane Chauke said: “Everything around the Guptas is made or starts in North West province. That is where it starts,” Chauke said. “I don’t see a company that goes without the involvement of the MEC or the premier in that province.”
The Mercury