Durban - Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe has called on mining companies to contribute more meaningfully to the development of communities in which they operate.
Speaking at the start of the two-day KZN Mining Indaba in Newcastle on Wednesday, 
Mantashe said the mining sector had an important role to play in the transformation of the economy.

He encouraged mines to involve communities and workers more in decision-making processes, saying workers should not only be given shares but be allowed to sit on the boards of companies.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“If you allow them to be on the board you are also committing them to the company. This is an approach whose origin 
is in the Nordic countries. That is why if you talk Volvo the workers are involved because they own Volvo. If you take all the German cars, those workers take pride in those brands,” he said.

He slammed vendor financing as a means of empowerment or transferring wealth, saying this has proven to be counter-productive to new players in the industry.

“Vendor financing gobbles all the dividends that should come to you (as a player), and you pay back your debt but you never benefit. 

“Actually, the period for debt is longer than the life of the mine. We have created a false situation of people feeling like they are partners but there was no intention to transfer wealth.”

Mantashe said the mining sector had contributed largely to creating wealthy black 
people. He said this was in 
line with BEE objectives 
meant largely to create black capitalists. 

“There are many white capitalists, so we must create enough black capitalists so that there is a balance in the economy, otherwise we will be dominated, we will be captured because economically we have no power,” he said.

He also warned new entrants into the mining industry not to venture in with the aim of making a quick buck.

“Mining is a long-haul industry. It is not a short-term. If you want quick cash, do not go into mining,” Mantashe said.

KZN MEC Sihle Zikalala said despite its size, the mining sector in the province was key to the provincial economy.

“The sector employed 4000 direct employees, rising to more than 15000 indirectly. 

“KwaZulu-­Natal has substantial reserves for a number of minerals including mineral sands and coal with a good promise for unlocking future value,” Zikalala said.
The Mercury