Durban - One of the poorest schools in KwaZulu-Natal received the first instalment of a year’s worth of sanitary pads late last week.
Ezakheleni High School in the King Cetshwayo district was the first beneficiary of a R1million donation by mining company South 32 that will pay for 3000 schoolgirls in the district to receive a year’s supply of pads. 

The donation was made 22 years to the date that Nelson Mandela opened the company’s smelter at Hillside in nearby Richard’s Bay, when the company was still part of BHP Billiton.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The donation is the biggest yet for NGO Caring4Girls in KZN. 

The school of 809 pupils produced a 91% pass rate last year despite being terribly overcrowded and lacking both a physical science lab or a computer centre.

“I am not asking for your pity,” said principal Mboneni Zulu, “I just want you to understand our circumstances; we should have 20 classrooms, but we only have 12.

“The teachers don’t have 
separate toilets but have to use the same ones the learners use. This is a no-fee school and our coffers are empty.

“It’s always a challenge for our learners because we want them to be competitive when they go to university, I don’t want them to go not knowing what a mouse is.

“We teach science but our 
learners don’t even know what a test tube is. 

“But even despite this, we have never had the matric pass rate drop below 70% in the last 10 years.”

KZN Education Department circuit manager Themba Mabaso said the area the school served was desperately poor. 

“Most people are unemployed, they are subsistence farmers if anything. Some are child-headed households, some of the learners themselves are parents.

“Thank you,” he said, “for restoring the dignity of black women, there is no reason now for anyone not to come to school when nature takes its toll.”

The girls screamed and ululated as TV and stage actress Phindile Gwala used the opportunity to walk among them, encouraging them to use every opportunity to become part of history and achieve their 
potential rather than just accept their fates. Studies estimate that teenage girls living in poverty can lose up to a fifth of their education because of the embarrassment of not being able to deal with their period and the taboos still associated with menstruation.

Caring4Girls, founded by social entrepreneur Richard Mabaso’s 
Imbumba Foundation, ensured that 146000 girls, predominantly in 
Gauteng and Mpumalanga, didn’t miss a single day’s education because of their period last year.



*  If you would like to know more about Caring4Girls, contact Nkateko Mabale on 
0118830379 or 0662142520
The Mercury