Durban - Three KwaZulu-Natal sportsmen will be among the proud recipients of the 24th National Orders, to be awarded by President Cyril Ramaphosa at the Union Buildings next Saturday.
The National Orders were announced on Thursday by Dr Cassius Lubisi, the chancellor of the awards.

He said the awards were the highest honour a country could bestow on its citizens and eminent foreign nationals who had contributed to the ­advancement of democracy.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Order of Ikhamanga, which recognises South African citizens who have excelled in the fields of arts, culture, literature, music, journalism and sport, will be bestowed in bronze on cricketer Hashim Amla, soccer legend Neil Tovey, and rugby’s John Smit for their contributions to their respective sports. 

Other awardees include four former heads of African countries. 

The four ex-presidents will be bestowed with the Order of the Companion of OR Tambo in gold, which recognises ­eminent foreigners for friendship shown to South Africa. 

One of them is the second president of Mozambique, Joaquim Chissano, who will 
be honoured for his instrumental role in transforming his ­country into a thriving 
democracy.

Former Botswana president Sir Ketumile Masire will be honoured posthumously in the same category for his exceptional contribution to peace and liberation in South Africa, Rwanda and the southern African region.

Masire’s counterpart, former Namibian president Sam Nujoma, will receive the same award for opposing the apartheid government.

In addition, Ramaphosa will bestow honours on the first female president in Africa, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia. 

“The honour will be for her exceptional contribution to women’s leadership on the African continent,” said Lubisi.

Legendary South African musician Sipho “Hotstix” Mabuse will be awarded the Order of Ikhamanga in silver for his contribution to music and social cohesion.

Retired Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke will be honoured for his outstanding contribution in the field of law and the administration of justice in the country.
The Mercury