Durban - One of the stalwarts of the Sharks setup, Keegan Daniel will be retiring from all rugby at the conclusion of this year’s Super Rugby tournament.
After more than 10 years in the colours of the Sharks, and with more than a century of games under his belt, the live-wire flank feels the time is right to finally hang up his boots. 

Daniel is one of the few Sharks players to have been capped over 100 times in the Currie Cup, as well as Super Rugby, and he also has a few Springbok caps to his name.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Daniel has never been the biggest of players, but his skill and drive have gotten him far. 

He is an important leader at the Sharks and has been a mentor to many youngsters who have made their way through the ranks.

Perhaps his defining moment as a leader came when he led the Sharks' Currie Cup team to glory against Western Province in Cape Town. 

Commenting on Daniel’s career, Sharks chief executive Gary Teichmann said: “He has given his heart and soul to this brand and he can be proud of what he has achieved over the years. His massive contribution both as a leader and mentor to the young players is commendable and will always be remembered.

“He has been a tremendous ambassador both on and off the playing field and we thank him for his invaluable contribution, which we will look back on with fondness.”

Said Daniel: “The decision to retire was not an easy one to make, but after much consideration I believe that this is the right time for me to move on.

"This place has given me so much and I leave with some of the greatest memories made and friendships forged.

“I arrived in Durban as a youngster with a dream to play rugby on the highest stage and I have been blessed to have achieved some wonderful triumphs in my career. Thank you to every person who has impacted my life and who has contributed to my career. I bow out as a proud man!”

Added Teichmann: “Our best wishes are extended to Keegan and his wife Tania on this next chapter of life.”

*  So far this season the Sharks’ Super Rugby challenge could be summed up as the hunt for their mysterious mojo, and their inability to hang onto the slippery customer when it seemed secured, reports Mike Greenaway

The Sharks were hesitant in their first month of the season and almost seemed afraid to cut loose at Kings Park. And when they went on tour, their lack of confidence in backing themselves resulted in disappointing losses to the Brumbies and especially the Rebels.

It was when they arrived in New Zealand after their humiliation in Melbourne that the Sharks pulled themselves together and resolved to attack to win, rather than defend well and leave the rest to fortune.

The Blues were dispatched with ease, the Hurricanes all but beaten on their home turf, and the Durbanites returned home in chipper mood ready to tackle two crucial home derbies before their bye next week.

Only for their will-o’-the wisp mojo to sneak off into the rain-leaden clouds over Kings Park for the Bulls game. The forwards were given a clout by their Pretoria counterparts and nothing went right for the retreating backs. The Sharks looked like they were running on empty and by the end of the match were sitting ducks.

Centre Lukhanyo Am is at a loss to explain why the Sharks went into their shells last week.

“We had a decent tour and were confident when we returned from New Zealand,” the 24-year-old said.

“We believed we had turned the corner and would kick on. It did not happen, nothing went to plan and we did not adapt well to the (inclement) conditions. The Bulls did and that is one of the main reasons they came out on top.”

The Sharks have been chastised by all and sundry for losing by 30 points at home, and the players know that to lose another home derby this week against the Stormers could scupper their campaign.

As it is, the Lions are just about over the hill and far away as far as the South African conference is concerned, and probably the best the Sharks can hope for is to finish second. That is unlikely to happen if they lose a second consecutive home match against a team in their conference.

Am says the Sharks are hoping to bounce back from the Bulls defeat in the same manner as they recovered from the loss to the Rebels to thrash the Blues.

“This game against the Stormers could be our season-changer,” Am said. “We need to back ourselves to win, we need to regain our confidence for the games ahead, and we must build consistency going forward.”

Am, who made his Test debut last November in the Springboks' defeat to Wales, is no stranger to adversity. In 2016 he played Super Rugby for the Kings, on loan from the Sharks, and played 10 games for a struggling team.
The Mercury