Durban - Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng believes having a progressive constitution will not be enough to root out racism in the country.
He said racism, land disposition and exclusivity in the economic sector was preventing the country from moving forward. 

He was speaking at the Durban Country Club where he was hosted by Absa to discuss the future of South Africa in the light of the constitution. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The event was attended by over 100 guests, including Durban businessman Vivian Reddy, Reverend Dr Vukile Mehana, Absa’s provincial executives and a number of people from the legal fraternity. 

Justice Mogoeng read the preamble from the constitution, 
saying that the country’s past 
was reflected in the supreme law which showed that there were injustices. 

“We are over 24 years into our democracy but I am not too sure if the progress engenders the reality. 

“Unless we know our past and are able to make sense of it, we will never be able to understand what is happening today,” he said. 

Justice Mogoeng questioned what programmes the government had developed to root out racism and who was implementing them. 

He said racism was deeply rooted and one needed to be debriefed, including black South Africans. 

“The incidents we’ve been seeing are only the symptoms there’s a lot of work that still needs to be done. Until people grapple with the monster, we will be accusing and counter-accusing,” he said. 

He also highlighted the issue of gender equality in the business sector, saying women were being sidelined for top jobs. 

“We need to also root out chauvinism. Some think I’m racist but it’s confronting the realities that cry out for confrontation so we don’t have a society based on a lie,” Justice Mogoeng said. 

If society continued to pretend it was normal that women in particular, and black people in general did not get quality work, “we are doing prosperity a disservice”, he said. 

South Africa had the means to come up with solutions to solve the land issues and many other issues. 

“If you really want a solution, we will get it. Why are we shying away?” he asked. 

He called on the business community to make contact and work with the government to develop sustainable plans for South Africa’s future. 
The Mercury