Durban - Steinhoff’s annual general meeting, in the next few days, is likely to reveal more ­financial malfeasance as MPs want action to be taken against those implicated in an accounting scandal that has seen pensioners lose billions of rand.
The chairperson of the standing committee on public accounts, Themba Godi, said on Thursday they had expected more details on the audited ­financial statements when these were released next week.

However, Godi said they want more information from the investigation conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) into the irregularities at Steinhoff.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Opposition parties said they hoped the annual general meeting (AGM) next week would shed more light on what had happened, including audited financial statements over the last few years.

Steinhoff has lost more than 90% of its value since the accounting scandal broke in December, and this week the company sold more than 200million shares of its subsidiary Steinhoff Africa Retail Limited (STAR) and raised R3.7 billion to refinance some of its debt. The market value of shares held by the Government Employee Pension Fund in Steinhoff declined from R27.6bn in March last year to R2.9bn by January 19  this year.

Quickly

Godi said they want the work done by PwC to be completed quickly.

“In the first instance, our major focus is on the work done by PwC. The AGM might focus on issues, and the AGM is supposed to appoint new board members because they had temporary board members. With the AGM, the new board will be empowered to act more boldly,” said Godi.

He said that when Steinhoff returned to Parliament next month, MPs wanted additional facts on the extent of the irregularities.

“When we engage, they (the new board) must act directly because the leaders of Steinhoff have been evasive, and have used Parliament for damage control and not for ­accountability,” he said.

He said they wanted reports on the work streams of PwC.

David Maynier of the DA said they wanted former Steinhoff chief executive Markus Jooste to account to Parliament. Jooste refused to appear in Parliament a few weeks ago.

Maynier said Jooste should be summonsed to the House next month.

“As the pressure builds, some of the directors implicated in the scandal are beginning to rat on each other to save their skins. That is how new information began to emerge this week about suspicious margin calls and forward sales at Steinhoff International Holdings NV,” said Maynier.

Steve Swart of the ACDP said he hoped the AGM next Friday would give clarity on some of the problems that ­unfolded at Steinhoff.

“It will be good if further clarity is provided because there is uncertainty of what happened. I think the AGM will reveal the true extent of what happened at Steinhoff,” he said.

When Steinhoff and PwC appeared before the joint committees of Parliament, including Scopa, the finance committee and the trade and industry portfolio committee, it said the AGMs would get the financial statements of the business.
The Mercury