Durban - The Durban branch of Umkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) is threatening mayhem if the eThekwini Municipality fails to honour its promise to provide them with jobs, housing and business opportunities.
The MKMVA members said there is a standing agreement that 10% of opportunities in the municipality would be set aside for military veterans. 

About 200 members protested outside the city hall demanding the city deliver on their promises. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Fearing possible chaos, all major entrances to the city hall were closed and a large contingent of SAPS and metro police officers were deployed to the area to monitor the protest. 

Late yesterday, sources at the municipality said workers at the city hall had been prevented from leaving the building by protesters and had to be escorted out by police officers.

The protesters were in a no-nonsense mood yesterday morning and displayed open hostility to people taking pictures of them.

Leaders of the protest, who did not want to be named, said peaceful protests would soon come to an end and more drastic action would be taken.

“We are going to take much more forceful action. We will use tactics used by the business forum Delangokubona ­because it seems that is the only language the officials understand,” said one of the leaders.

“We were trained by the ANC, we do not want to find ourselves using those tactics against our organisations,” said another leader.

“There was an agreement signed last year with the municipality that reserved about 10% of job opportunities, business opportunities among other things, for military veterans,” said the leader. 

He said there are about 700 soldiers unemployed that belong to the MKMVA. 

 “This is the third or fourth time that we are coming out here to protest. 

“There have been countless boardroom meetings that have produced nothing. Our members no longer trust what we say,” he said. 

The leaders said there is a desk for military veterans that  was set up by the municipality, but it is not functioning and has no permanent staff. 

Mayor Zandile Gumede’s spokesperson Mthunzi Gumede said: “We are dealing with the issues that are raised by the military veterans and all those issues will be sorted out. They might not happen on someone’s timeline but they will happen.” 

He said he was aware of the rumours that workers were prevented from leaving the city hall and had to be escorted out but said he could not confirm this. 

MKMVA members have caused problems in other municipalities.Last week, they invaded a housing project in the Ray Nkonyeni Municipality in Port Shepstone.

Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said that in that incident, 13 suspects invaded Masinenge housing project and were arrested.

They appeared in the Port Shepstone Magistrate’s Court and the case was adjourned to April 6. They remain in cus­tody.

Members of MKMVA have also illegally invaded a housing project in Pietermaritzburg. 
The Mercury