Durban - eTHEKWINI mayor Zandile Gumede has promised to crack the whip at Durban Solid Waste (DSW), the leadership of which she blames for the filth in the city, and has inserted a new overseer into the unit.
Speaking at an executive committee meeting on Tuesday, Gumede said change was on its way as a project manager had been roped in from another unit to oversee the running of the department.

DSW’s head and deputy head were expected to report to this new project manager.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The decision comes as 
DSW head Raymond Rampersad is on three months leave which he took allegedly because of pressure from the top.

Gumede said: “We have had a serious challenge of leadership within the department.”

She said that while she had wanted to act on problems at DSW, she had been wary of being accused of purging officials and of being behind the “exodus” of officials.

“Within the unit right now there is a female and she is doing very well,” she said. 

Sources at City Hall and in DSW were suspicious of the move, however. 

They believe it to be part of an ongoing battle between the mayor and Rampersad.

An ANC councillor, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said some of the officials were “still suffering from a hangover of longing for the previous era and they have refused to accept and work with the mayor”. 

Rampersad could not be reached for comment yesterday.

Last week, DA caucus leader Nicole Graham wrote to the city manager requesting information about Rampersad’s long leave. 

Graham also wanted clarity on whether it was true that Rampersad’s attempt to suspend his deputy, Robert Abbu, had been overturned by the city manager. 

By yesterday she had not 
received a response to her questions.

“We are deeply concerned by what is happening at DSW. The mayor must be clear about who this person she is alluding to is and what her duties are. DSW affects all the citizens of eThekwini,” Graham said.

In what is believed to be 
a reference to Rampersad going on leave, the mayor told the committee the city manager had been “bold enough to assist me because I have been complaining that we have the head, the deputy head, managers, supervisors and everyone but our city is still not clean”.

Gumede said she wanted the department to have people who were hard workers. “Even the supervisors we said we cannot have supervisors who are getting paid but we cannot see what they are supervising.” 

Other sources close to Rampersad said the appointment of the project manager was meant to undermine and frustrate him. “When he goes back to work in July he will not report to her ,” the source said.

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said there was instability at DSW and this was because of the officials aligning themselves to different camps within the ruling party.

“In some of the cases you have senior officials being aligned to a camp that is no longer in power, and a junior official being aligned to the camp that is in power. 

“In that case the junior official will not take instructions from the senior,” he said.

While the mayor did not divulge the name of the official, sources close to the process said she was talking about Noluthando Magewu, an official from the city’s Trading Services cluster who is now said to be serving as the acting head of the department.

An official at DSW, who also spoke on condition of anonymity, said the mayor could not blame everything on the unit. 

“The filth in the city does not mean litter only. There is a unit at the city that is meant to deal with bad buildings, there is another one that is meant to deal with illegal traders, and another one that has to deal with illegal taxi ranks. 

“If those units are not doing their jobs, DSW cannot be blamed for that.”
The Mercury