Durban - The South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) is threatening a march against the KwaZulu-Natal education department over its failure to pay salary increments for Grade R teachers that are a year overdue.
The union has alleged that the department agreed to pay the increase for this year, ­beginning in April, but the increases will not be backdated to April 2017 when they should have been implemented.

In the past few weeks, Grade R teachers have held lunchtime pickets outside the department’s head offices in Pietermaritzburg protesting the delays.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Sadtu provincial secretary Nomarashiya Caluza said: “Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane has said they will start paying salary increments for Grade R Teachers, but they want to start paying this month (April) and they will not pay the 2017 increase.”

“Where have you ever heard that workers are just expected to forfeit their salary increase? 

“This is something that has never happened and it is the first time that we have ever heard of something like this.”

She said the MEC’s suggestion was rejected by the union. 

“They keep claiming they do not have money and that is why they are not paying, but they have money to spend on sanitary towels. We know the department has the money,” she said.

Caluza said they had given the department seven days to address the matter, failing which there will be a march. 

She said they were also concerned that there were around 4000 vacancies in the department.

“Most of these vacancies are in offices. We have a situation right now that one supervisor is overseeing five districts when in fact that person is supposed to be looking after just one district. That person is now doing work supposed to be done by five people.”

Department spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said he could not respond to Sadtu’s statements. 

“What I know is that the MEC has said there are engagements on the issue of paying Grade R teachers’ salaries but I am not aware of any time frames.”
The Mercury