Durban - Minister of Higher Education and Training Naledi Pandor has ordered the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) to deal with delays in disbursing financial aid that have led to student protests at several institutions.
This, as four Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges under the Ilembe-Umfolozi management area have already shut down because of student protests.

Almost four months into the academic year, students are still waiting to receive their financial aid allowances that include money for food, books, accommodation and travel. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Chief Albert Luthuli College as well as Sundumbili, Sithebe and Mandeni closed due to protests last week. 

The Mercury understands Esikhawini College is likely to join the protest today. 

Nsikelelo Masango, deputy chairperson of the student 
representative council at Chief Albert Luthuli, said the protests would be intensified today.

“We will meet outside the school gates with the members of the community and members of other political structures to protest. We intend to also close roads in the area,” he said.

“We have resolved to stay outside (stay away from classes) until this matter is resolved. I know that there are some students who have received calls (from the college administration) to bring their banking details. I am not sure if that is for the payments,” he said. 

Department of Higher Education and Training spokesperson Lunga Ngqengelele said the minister was concerned that some students were yet to receive their financial aid benefits.

“It goes without mentioning that minister Pandor is concerned about every closure of an institution of higher learning because of protests,” he said 

“With regards to NSFAS issues, she has directed the department, through the director general, to work with NSFAS to resolve all challenges that result in students not receiving their allowances.”

Attempts to contact NSFAS and the management of the campuses yesterday were unsuccessful.
The Mercury