Durban - Senior officials at a high school in Estcourt have been accused of illegally collecting thousands of rand for “housekeeping” from pupils despite it being a no-fee school.
However, the principal has denied the allegations and only confirmed that pupils 
had to pay for books that 
they lost.

Parents have accused the officials of “extorting” money from them for trips, lost books and to pay security guards and temporary teachers.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Handwritten documents with a Department of Education official stamp, which The Mercury has seen, shows the names of pupils and the amounts of money they have been asked to pay. 

These date back to 2012.

A source in the community alleged in written documents that the school management demanded pupils pay R500 for a camping trip, despite the fact that it had been sponsored by a local company.

“We have also been asked to pay about R170 for two teachers, but these teachers have never been paid a cent. We want to know where is 
our money going,” said the source.

“We have now been asked 
to pay R50 to provide a 
security guard whereas the security at the school is also sponsored.”

It was also alleged that the school’s management is withholding report cards unless the pupils pay R200 for text books they have lost.

The school’s principal, who was only identified as a Mr Maphanga, said he is not allowed to speak to the media without approval from the 
department. 

“I can only speak on the retrieval policy - if the student loses a book, that student is expected to pay for that book.” 

He said the allegations against him could be part of a smear campaign. “I am a principal here 
and as I am in that position, people like to talk.”

KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the allegations were serious and would be probed.

“This is especially bad as the school is considered to be a no fee school. 

“Whenever we designate the school as a no-fee school it is because we have assessed the resources in the area and decided on what the community can afford.

“This kind of behaviour is a problem. Money collected 
in this manner cannot be 
properly accounted for.” 
The Mercury