Durban - Golf is a game generally associated with the wealthy. It is not like soccer, where you can play a quick game in the park.
One has to pay exorbitant fees to learn the game, purchase expensive golf clubs, balls, clothing, special shoes -  and then pay up to R500 to play 18 holes. 

Above all, one needs time to play golf. While South Africa’s black nouveau riche are now found frequenting the golf courses in our democratic dispensation, the majority of black golfers in past years were working-class citizens  who learnt the game while ­caddying for whites, and were usually allowed to play on white courses on Mondays. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In the whole of Durban, for example, there was just one golf course for blacks, Curries Fountain.

Talented black golfers of the past include names like Ramnath Bambata, Vincent Tshabalala, Richard Mogoerane, Ismail Chowglay, Simon “Cox” Nhlapo, and many ­others. 

The most celebrated black golfer, however, was Papwa Sewsunker Sewgolum. 

He is regarded by many as the greatest black golfer produced in this country, and one who would certainly have been among the country’s best ever golfers of all races were it not for apartheid. 

Papwa, as he was known, was born in 1928 to a family that had arrived as indentured migrants from India and worked on sugar cane farms on the Natal north coast. 

Papwa was born in a tin shanty in Riverside, about a kilometre from the all-white Beachwood Golf Club. 

He had to start working at a young age to support the ­family, as his mother went blind when he was still a young boy, and his father, who cut grass for the Durban Corpor­ation, died when he was a ­teenager. 

Young Papwa worked as a caddy at Beachwood. He was captivated by the game of golf and learnt it by spending many hours hitting a golf ball with the branch of a tree. 

From around the age of 11 or 12, he entered tournaments for caddies, and won them most of the time. 

He was famous for his unorthodox method of holding the club, with a back-handed grip, hands positioned the opposite way to the traditional grip, as much as he was for his “short game”, pitching, chipping, putting and bunker shots within 100m of the hole. 

Gary Player said after Papwa famously beat him in the 1965 Natal Open: “He chipped like a man from Mars.”

In 1946, just 18, Papwa participated at the Natal Indian Open at the nine-hole course 
at Curries Fountain, and won. 

In 1950, he married Sumin­thra and they had five children - Romila, Denish, Rajen, Sewnarain and Deepraj. 

Papwa won the Non-European Natal Open Championship in 1954, 1955 and 1958. 

He was determined to play professionally, but did not have the funds to do so. 

Fortunately, a local businessman who was impressed with Papwa’s knowledge of golf when Papwa caddied for him, and learnt of his many victories in the Non-European Open, Graham Wulff, and his partners raised money and took Papwa to play in the 
British and Dutch Opens in 1959. 

While we regale on the story of Papwa, it is equally important to honour the legacy of Wulff. 

Pawpa’s golfing potential and subsequent success on his maiden tour of Europe in 1959 was all due to the generosity of Wulff and his partners. 

Wulff, the inventor of Oil of Olay, together with his wife, flew with Papwa to Europe, paying for all the costs that came along with this trip. 

On their return, Wulff was frequently asked why they had helped Papwa.

Wulff said: “People are ­constantly asking us what we are getting out of this. The ­answer is: nothing. We simply felt that anyone with great skill, regardless of colour, deserves a chance.” 

Wulff’s generosity to support an underprivileged, competent black golfer in a time when this was unheard of, should provide inspiration for South Africans today. 

As a black person, Papwa was not allowed to play in the more lucrative white tournaments in South Africa. 

So Papwa came to the notice of the world when he won the Dutch Open in 1959, and repeated the feat in 1960 and 1964. 

That year of 1959, Papwa was given a moving reception on his return. He was escorted home by a convoy of cars and was guest of honour and kicked off a soccer match at Curries Fountain between the Natal Indian XI and Coloured XI. 

Papwa had applied to play in the (white) Natal Open, and after procrastinating on the matter for several years, the Natal Golf Union, together with the local Durban Country Club executives, eventually gave Papwa permission to play in the tournament in 1963. 

He was not, however, permitted to use the clubhouse and had to change in his car and eat with the black caddies, while white golfers ate food prepared and served, ironically, by Indians in the luxurious clubhouse. 

Papwa’s win in the Dutch Open increased his self-belief and he was constantly improving, even though he had little competition and had to put up with abysmal facilities. 

When the course at Curries Fountain was destroyed to make way for schools, for several years there was no golf course for blacks until Springfield was opened in 1961. And that course did not even have a clubhouse until 1980.

Papwa shocked local whites when he won the Natal Open in 1963, defeating Bobby Verwey and Denis Hutchinson by one stroke. 

He was not permitted to enter the clubhouse, and even though it began raining heavily as he was about to collect his trophy, he had to do so outdoors under an umbrella in pouring rain. 

Whatever the official explanation, a photograph of Papwa being handed his trophy in the rain while white golfers received their prizes indoors, went viral, in contemporary parlance, and caused a global outrage. It was a huge embarrassment to the South African government and white golfing fraternity. 

The photograph made as much news as Papwa’s victory. 

In the same year (1963), further validation of Papwa’s golfing prowess came when he finished 13th in the British Open played at Royal Lytham & St Anne’s Golf Club in England. In the first round of that championship, Papwa was tied 10th on the leader board with a score of 71 - together with the greatest player of all time, Jack Nicklaus! 

Although several applications to play in the South African Open were declined, Papwa was eventually given permission to play in the SA Open in 1963. He lost to Retief Waltman by a single shot, and in 1964 he participated again in the SA Open, this time in Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State, where Indians had been barred since the 1890s. 

This time, he tied for third place with South African great Gary Player. 

In 1965, Papwa achieved the seemingly impossible when he beat Gary Player in the Natal Open, which Player had already won four times. 

Player was in scintillating form in 1965, winning the US Open, Australian Open, and SA Open, the World Series, World Matchplay and the Individual World Cup, making Papwa’s feat all the more remarkable. 

This time it was not raining and all the players received their prizes outside. 

After his victory in the Natal Open, the apartheid ­regime, probably embarrassed by a black man defeating whites, refused Papwa further permission to play in white tournaments.

He continued winning the non-European tournaments by large margins, but this earned him a pittance. His average monthly income was around R35 in 1965. 

Papwa’s subsequent travels to Europe, the US and Australia were not successful, for he did not have a proper manager and support team. 

Beating Player in the Natal Open and having matched him in the SA Open attests to the quality of Papwa’s ability. Who knows what heights he would have reached as a golfer were it not for apartheid? 

Yet, because of apartheid, the lives of Player and Papwa panned out so differently. 

While Player went on to become one of the greatest players the game has known, and a multi-millionaire, Papwa died in 1978, penniless and a broken man because he was denied the opportunity to do what he loved most in life - play golf at the highest levels. 

In moving forward from this painful reminder of our divided past, perhaps the greatest tribute we can all pay to the “deferred dream” of past black golfers is to find and nurture a Tiger Woods of South Africa. 

A new class of golfers who would make us all proud and smile when recalling the names of Papwa Sewsunker Sewgolum, Ramnath Bambata, Vincent Tshabalala, Richard Mogoerane, Ismail Chowglay, Simon ‘Cox’ Nhlapo while they now walk on greener fairways.



*  Naidoo is the curator at the 1860 Heritage Centre.

The Mercury