Durban - Think big hair, twirly skirts, popcorn, shoulder pads, mullets, disco, rock and roller skates. This month, That 80s Show at the Rockwood Theatre in Sibaya takes you back in time to when beautiful music and phenomenal voices rocked your world.
With the fortunate exclusion of mixtapes and a Walkman on the hip, diehard fans will be transported back in time with musical tributes to the likes of the Police, Duran Duran, Rick Springfield, Blondie, Madonna, Bananarama, The Bangles, Yazoo, INXS, Phil Collins and Michael Jackson, to name a few.

“Fans of 80s music are absolutely going to love this show with all the anthems, all the great music and the nostalgia of times gone by but never ever forgotten,” says Janet Pillay, public relations manager of Sibaya Casino and Entertainment Kingdom. “It is going to be a spectacular show.” ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Arguably the decade synonymous with some of the greatest hits of all time, the 80s is filled with memories for so many. From Pac-Man to the emergence of music channels such as MTV and VH1, and fines for returning VHS cassettes to the video store unwound back to the start, the 80s is all about rewind, remember and reminisce.

Members of the audience will not be able to stay seated and will find themselves dancing in the aisles to the more upbeat tunes, swooning to the ballads and other high-quality tracks of drums, bass and voices to send shivers down your spine.

Rockwood Theatre at Sibaya Casino & Entertainment Kingdom offers a family-friendly environment with a casual dining, supper theatre experience and a delicious menu, fully stocked bar and state-of-the-art facilities.

The theatre also offers an array of exciting deals, including buy-1-get-1-free on Thursday nights, R200; Saturday and Friday nights are R130 a person, and Sundays with adults, R130 a person, kids under-12 free and pensioners receive a 50 percent discount.

Reserve your seats to That 80s Show by calling 0311610000 or visiting www.rockwoodtheatre.co.za, or the booking office at Sibaya Casino & Entertainment Kingdom. 

The show runs from April 12 to June 17, excluding June 7 and 8, when The Parlotones will be performing.

 For more information on Sibaya, visit www.suninternational.com or follow Sibaya on www.facebook.com/yoursibaya or on Twitter @SibayaCasino
The Mercury