Durban - Medical staff at Pomeroy Community Health Centre (CHC) had to perform an emergency delivery of twins for a 23-year-old woman
Nonjabulo Buthelezi, 23, had been booked to deliver as a high-risk patient at Grey’s Hospital on April 30 because there were concerns about the growth of the twins that she was carrying.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“However, on Wednesday, April 25, while at home at Pomeroy, she started experiencing mild cramps earlier in the day. She did not think much of it. But in the evening, it became clear that she was going into labour. She was rushed to Pomeroy CHC,” said Agiza Hlongwane, Department of Health in KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson.
He said that as a safety precaution, women who are expecting twins are referred to district or regional hospital, as these normally have better resources, such as medical theatres, more skilled staff and emergency blood stocks. 
He said Buthelezi gave birth to Siyabonga and Zenande, a boy and a girl, weighing 1350g and 1950g, respectively. She was immediately transferred to Church of Scotland Hospital in a specialised obstetrics ambulance, where one of the babies, Siyabonga, was put in a nursery because of his low birth weight.
“My message to the doctor and medical staff at Pomeroy is that they must continue helping others, and treat them as well as they treated me. Even though I was scared, they were able to put me at ease and help me. I even asked them why I was told I needed to go to Grey’s Hospital when they were so well-equipped to help me,” said Buthelezi.
Buthelezi also had a four-year-old child and wants to be a social worker.
Dr Sanele Madela, CEO of Pomeroy CHC, who was trained in Cuba, said he was on call when he was informed that Buthelezi had been admitted at the facility, fully dilated and needed to deliver her twins. 
“We had no choice but to deliver her immediately,” Madela said. “If a person is expecting twins, we prefer them to give birth in a hospital that has a theatre, because if there are complications during the labour and delivery process, you can rush into theatre and save hers and the baby’s life. It is always safer in a district or regional hospital.”
He said that when a woman is expecting twins it means that her cervix will be bigger, and after giving birth, it may not return to its normal size early enough, which makes her more susceptible to bleeding after delivering.
“Bleeding is one of the main factors that lead to mothers dying after birth,” he said.
“We prepared everything to ensure that we are ready. We were proactive. We anticipated everything.  We did not want to start looking for things that we knew we would need. We made sure the necessary drugs are in place so that once the second baby is out, and we have removed the placenta, we administer them. We did not want to wait for the mother to bleed. We prevented it from the word go,” he continued.
Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC, congratulated the medical team at Pomeroy CHC and also urged expectant mothers generally not to travel too far away from health facilities when they are due to deliver.
“We are proud of what Dr Madela and his team have managed to do to help the mother of the twins. It takes nothing less than expertise, passion and dedication of all concerned to ensure that such a risky operation goes off smoothly. Although it is difficult to predict accurately when Mother Nature will take its course, we urge expectant mothers to make use of the mothers’ lodges which are available at some of our hospitals when they are close to their date of delivery. In cases of hospitals that do not have mothers’ lodges yet, we urge mothers not to travel too far from home, so that if they go into labour, they can be transported easily to the nearest health facility.”
Daily News