Durban - We’ve all been approached at some point or another to purchase a rose or fluffy toy to help raise funds for a worthy cause. As the lady selling the basket of goodies leaves your table, the discussion often turns to whether the money ever reaches the charity – right?

According to Malvern Child and Youth Care Centre Public Relations and Fundraising Officer, Lee Jarrett, the funding helps to make a difference in the lives of more than 100 vulnerable and orphaned children each month. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We gave permission to Petals of Hope to fundraise on our behalf at the start of 2017. Since then we have not only received a regular flow of funding, but these wonderful ladies - whom I consider valuable ambassadors of our Child and Youth Care Centre – have gone the extra mile to forward contact details of people they have engaged with who want to help us on a deeper level,” Jarrett said. 

She explained that the children, aged between 2 and 18 years, have been removed from their families by the Children’s Court for various reasons such as abuse, neglect and poverty and placed in the care of the Centre. Although they receive a Government subsidy, it unfortunately does not cover the cost of the child’s physical, educational and therapeutic needs as the subsidy has not been increased for the past two years despite the ever-rising cost of living.

“The shortfall of funds therefore needs to be raised through fundraising projects, such as Petals of Hope, to ensure these children receive the protection of a safe and loving home. By buying a rose or fluffy toy you will be helping a vulnerable child receive the care they deserve, and through this help them to believe that they have not been forgotten and are indeed loved. So, please support the ladies of Petals of Hope, who hold our children close to their hearts,” she said.

Jarrett thanked the restaurants and pubs who allow Petals of Hope to engage with their patrons on their behalf. 

“Without your support, this fundraising project would not be possible,” she said. 

The Mercury