Durban - The Director-General of the State Security Agency Arthur Fraser, who has come under fire recently for allegedly ­interfering with an investigation against him, has been moved to the Department of Correctional Services.
Brian Dube, the spokesperson for the ministry of state security, said: “The transfer follows consultation between President Cyril Ramaphosa, the Minister of State Security, Ms Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba and Mr Fraser on the suitable ­location of the director-general. The transfer has been agreed upon with Mr Fraser and will be effective immediately.” 

Dube added that Loyiso Jafta has been appointed to act as the DG at the State Security Agency (SSA).ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Last week the Inspector-General of Intelligence (IGI), Setlhomamaru Dintwe, brought an urgent interdict to ask the Gauteng North High Court to bar Fraser from interfering with his duties.

In the matter, which is in court this week, Dintwe is asking for the protection of his office from interference as he probes corruption and abuse of intelligence services at SSA.

Last week, Fraser - who is implicated in the allegations levelled by the SACP and the DA - withdrew Dintwe’s security clearance, saying he could not be trusted with state ­secrets. This saw Dintwe unable to access information or to gain ­access to office.

The move intensified calls for Fraser’s removal.

In its complaint last year, the SACP alleged its leadership was being followed by spies after they became vocal against state capture.

SACP national spokesperson Alex Mashilo said action needed to be taken against Fraser, including an investigation on his decision to withdraw Dintwe’s security clearance.

“It has to be looked at ­because it almost brought the investigation (against Fraser) to an end. What he simply did was to disarm the investigator by withdrawing the security clearance,” he said. “Even a person who does not know anything about intelligence services can see that the reason why the security clearance of the IGI was withdrawn was ­because of the investigation.

“There must be corrective action so the IGI continues with his job without fear, ­favour or interference,” Mashilo said.

According to claims in investigative journalist Jacques Pauw’s book The President’s Keepers, Fraser had previously created and headed a parallel intelligence network where agents sent intelligence to him instead of to the National Intelligence Agency.

These allegations were reported to Dintwe by the DA.
The Mercury