Durban - Student leaders at the Durban University of Techno­logy say they will continue to protest until all financial aid allowances are paid, despite a court interdict prohibiting them from doing so near the premises.
The order, granted by the Durban High Court on Wednesday, lists 17 respondents including current and some former students, such as Bonginkosi “Education” Khanyile, the EFF, ANC and its youth league, Sasco and the police. 

The court action comes after the recent disruption of lectures and a march by students to the office of DUT vice-chancellor Thandwa Mthembu, demanding that NSFAS students still owed food allowances be paid out immediately. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

According to the order, all the respondents, except the police, are prohibited from interfering with, threatening or even interacting with DUT employees, representatives or students while protesting. 

It also interdicts them from damaging university property and compels the police to take all reasonable steps to give ­effect to the order. 

In its founding affidavit, DUT alleges that the trouble started last Thursday when students showed unhappiness with SRC feedback on a meeting with management about NSFAS and the associated ­allowances. It claims former students and EFF Student Command member Khanyile and others forced a gate open and unlawfully entered university premises to speak to Mthembu. 

The ANCYL and Sasco joined in on Monday this week, disrupting lectures. 

Police were called in to disperse students with rubber bullets when they allegedly threw stones at the gates and security. 

In a statement on the matter on Tuesday, the university confirmed: “Some students have been hurt and needed to be hospitalised after an altercation with police A number of students and staff were left traumatised.”

Alan Khan, spokesperson for the university, said on Tuesday that the protest was not sanctioned by the SRC, which was working with the univer­sity on the backlog of allowances as agreed in a meeting last week. 

According to a university communique issued yesterday, almost 6400 students had been paid out. It was expected that almost 4300 more students would be paid out today, and 2100 more next Monday. 

Due to the staff strike the academic year started a month late and the continued protests meant “the probability and likelihood of completing the academic programme was 
materially jeopardised”, DUT said.
The Mercury