Durban - The multi-million rand ferry-boat transport project launched by Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane to ­assist pupils needing to cross rivers to get to school is barely working.
Only one ferry-boat is in operation.

This was revealed in responses to parliamentary questions asked by the DA, and was also confirmed by the department’s spokesperson this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The service was launched last year, and eight ferry-boats were purchased at a cost of R4million. 

It has been reported that there are almost 200 schools
in the province where pupils have to traverse water to get to class. 

The ferries, ­powered by ­petrol motors were to be manned by a qualified skipper every day.

Opposition parties are demanding an investigation into the matter, saying it was a waste of financial resources at a time when the department was facing serious financial pressure. 

In the response to the DA’s questions, the department ­confirmed eight ferry-boats had been purchased, but of these, only four had since been delivered. It said one ferry-boat was in use in uMkhanyakude District.

The department said that while the boats were needed, there was a lack of suitable areas from which the boats could launch.

“The need for ferry-boats existed, but on their arrival it was discovered that the landscape was not fully conducive for them to be launched,” said the department.

It said it was negotiating with different municipalities to address the landscape problem. The department said there were 23 pupils who were benefiting from the programme in uMkhanyakude.

A member of the school governing body at the Enkovukeni Primary School, in KwaNgwanase, who did not want to be named, said they had benefited from the programme. “The boats had brought some relief to pupils and teachers at the school.”

DA MPL and spokesperson on Education Dr Rishigen ­Viranna said they would be calling for a probe.  

“One of the excuses given by the department for the dumping of the three boats is that it was only after delivery that it was established that the landscape was not conducive for ferry-boats.

“This is simply inexcusable, and shows that there was clearly no assessment or even consultation with local schools and communities,” he said. 

IFP MPL and Education spokesperson Thembeni ka­Madlopha-Mthethwa said she felt department officials had deceived them. “We have been counting these schools as having been assisted. We now discover this is not the case.”
The Mercury