Britain's
Premier League said on Monday it was concerned about "scammers
and fraudsters" trafficking children to Britain with false
promises of playing for leading football clubs, in a trend
anti-slavery campaigners fear is going largely under the radar.
Thousands of suspected child slaves from countries including
Albania, Afghanistan, Sudan and Vietnam have been uncovered by
the British government in recent years - with most trapped in
forced labour, domestic servitude and sexual exploitation.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Many of them are first trafficked into Britain by men posing
as agents and criminal networks that offer the children and
their families the prospect of a lucrative footballing career
abroad and a salary to send back home, according to activists.
Instead of embarking on a career at a top club, many
children are abandoned or enslaved after being taken to Britain
in exchange for thousands of pounds - often their family's
savings - said anti-child trafficking charity ECPAT UK.
"It is very concerning to hear that scammers and fraudsters
are attempting to trick people in this way, and that it can lead
to such awful circumstances for young people," a spokeswoman for
the Premier League told the Thomson Reuters Foundation by email.
"Premier League clubs would never ask families from overseas
to pay for elite football trials for their children," she said
after an investigation by The Times newspaper, adding that the
league may speak to clubs about the extent of the phenomenon.
Nearly 2,120 children feared to have been trafficked were
referred for support to authorities in Britain last year, up
from about 1,300 in 2016, according to government figures.
Yet many child victims avoid seeking help or going to the
authorities as they fear they may be arrested or deported, said
Debbie Beadle, ECPAT's head of youth development programmes.
"The trafficking of children through false promises of a
footballing career is widely underreported through official
channels ... making it difficult to measure the true scale."
Under Britain's world-leading 2015 Modern Slavery Act, large
companies must produce an annual statement disclosing what they
have done to ensure their supply chains are free of slavery.
Several major football teams, including Manchester City and
Tottenham Hotspur, have outlined on their websites their
policies to ensure the wellbeing of children at their clubs.
Sierra Leonean and ex-Premier League footballer Alhassan
Bangura in 2015 said he was trafficked as a teenager to Britain,
where he narrowly escaped being forced into the sex trade.
At least 13,000 people in Britain are estimated by the
government to be victims of modern slavery - but police say the
true figure is far more likely to be in the tens of thousands.