Durban - Authur Fraser, the former director-general of the State Security Agency (SSA), has refused to answer questions on why he was redeployed to Correctional Services, and on his fights with the inspec­tor-general of Intelligence, Setlhomamaru Dintwe.On Thursday, Fraser arrived in Parliament in his new position as prisons boss, but refused to answer questions from the media.
However, the Deputy Minister of Correctional Services, Thabang Makwetla, told the portfolio committee on justice and correctional services it was the prerogative of President Cyril Ramaphosa to move directors-general.

Makwetla said the decision was taken following consultations in the government.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The position of director-general (of correctional services) was advertised in October last year, and the shortlisting was done. At the end of that period we told the acting national commissioner that we must extend that advert to allow more candidates to come to the pool,” said Makwetla.

A decision was taken that they must head-hunt for the position.

He said Ramaphosa’s decision to move Fraser to Correctional Services was normal practice.

Fraser will officially assume his duties at correctional services today.

Meanwhile, Dintwe has been given the nod to con­tinue his oversight work at 
the State Security Agency despite ­alleged threats to revoke his licence.

Yesterday, the High Court in Pretoria, sitting in the Palace of Justice, received confirmation from the Minister of 
State Security, Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba, in which she 
allowed the office of the Inspector General of Intelligence “to continue to ­exercise oversight over the SSA, and that 
the agency continues to discharge its mandate in terms of the law”.

SSA spokesperson Brian Dube said Let­satsi-Duba furnished the court with the letter before a court application by Dintwe in which he had asked the court to urgently interdict Fraser from revoking his security clearance certificate and interfering in his duties.

In his papers, Dintwe alleged that Fraser was trying to block an investigation into ­serious allegations against him. He also claimed Fraser was threatening him.

Interdicted

He asked that Fraser be ­interdicted from interfering in any manner whatsoever with the functions of the office of the inspector general of Intelligence.

He wanted the court to order Fraser to co-operate with the investigations lodged with his office.

Yesterday, Dube said the matter was discussed in the judge’s chambers, and it was agreed that the correspondence of the minister, which sought to provide relief to the inspector general, be accepted as a welcome intervention.

“The minister’s letter provisionally sets aside the withdrawal of the security clearance, which by extension will allow the inspector general to access his office and do his work.

“It also calls on the inspector general to subject himself to a process of reverting, which the acting director general will facilitate in terms of the law,” Dube said.

Outside court, lawyers for both parties declined to reveal details of the withdrawal of the case from the roll.
The Mercury