Durban - After a long-running battle with the City over its grave-recycling policy, the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL) feels that they could be close to reaching consensus.
Recently, the commission threatened to take the eThekwini Municipality to court, saying its policy on the re-use of graves was discriminatory against the poor and was in contravention of the constitution.

But this week the CRL commissioners sang a different tune and complimented mayor Zandile Gumede on the municipal plans to deal with the concerns raised.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

For several years, the commission had felt that the policy was discriminatory as it targeted mainly those graves without tombstones while those that had them were left untouched. 

In a hearing last month, the commission said poor families who could not afford to pay also faced prejudice when they had to renew their 10-year leases for grave sites.

Yesterday the City again appeared before the commission and admitted that it may have trampled on residents’ rights when applying its grave recycling policy. 

“We submit that the municipality is aware of the issue regarding recycling and re-use of graves without tombstones. We therefore submit that this matter was indirect discrimination. We had no intention to discriminate against the poor or disregard their rights,” Gumede said.

She said the municipality had relied solely on the KwaZulu-Natal Cemeteries and Crematoria Act (Act No 12 of 1996), which allowed for the practice.

Gumede said the city would seek to amend the act and would lobby the provincial government, particularly the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, for the amendments to be made, as certain aspects of the act could be in contravention of the constitution.

The act provides for the re-use of graves after 10 years and therefore the municipality advises families to lease graves so that they can be re-used after 10 years.

Gumede said that as part of dealing with the concerns of the commission, the City would also look at assisting families too poor to afford the R950 lease fee.

Gumede’s submissions impressed commission chairperson Thoko Mkhwanazi-Xaluva who said the commission had sought for several years to resolve the issue without positive results.

Speechless

“For the first time, we can really see light at the end of the tunnel. It has been an extremely long tunnel. There has been ducking and diving. I am speechless now, and it takes a lot for me to be speechless,” Mkhwanazi-Xaluva said as she heaped praise on Gumede.

The mayor also announced that the municipality planned to make use of a tracing agent to track down all those people whose lease renewals were overdue.

This would be for the purpose of consulting with those families before the grave sites are tampered with. “The suggested procedure will have to be conducted a year before the lease lapses,” she said.

The commission said it was currently dealing with complaints arising from the municipality’s grave-recycling policy. In one case, a grave was allocated to a new family without the knowledge of the family that had a loved one already buried on that site.

Mkhwanazi-Xaluva also said specific complaints would be dealt with on a separate platform.
The Mercury