Durban - Work is set to continue at the Oceans uMhlanga development today as a hard line is being taken against protesters and business forums that have been disrupting construction work at the site.

Yesterday scores of community members from the Blackburn area, under ward 35, protested at the site, demanding that they be given jobs.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Last Wednesday, members of the Forum For Radical Economic Transformation (FFRET) stopped construction at the site, demanding business ­opportunities.

The infamous Delangokubona group, known for stopping work at large construction sites in the province, is a member of FFRET.

Last week’s disruption by FFRET prompted developer Vivian Reddy to obtain a court interdict preventing the forum from interfering with the site.

Also read: WATCH: Workers chased off Oceans Umhlanga building site

Speaking on behalf of Reddy, the group corporate affairs executive and chief of staff of Edison Group, Brian Mpono, said yesterday that disruptions to work at the site would not be tolerated.

Mpono said the necessary steps had been taken to try to include some of those protesting in the project.

He said work at the site would resume today.

“Tomorrow the work is continuing, anyone who is interfering with the work will have to face the full might of the law. (Yesterday) when the protesters showed up, we took the decision that workers should stop working out of safety concerns,” he said.

One of the leaders of the protest, Siya Silangwe, said their protest was not part of the FFRET business forum and therefore the court interdict did not apply to them.

“All the people here are those just looking to get work at the site, this community is suffering,” said Silangwe.

“We do not want to come here disturbing the site but we find ourselves forced to.

“We will continue to disturb the site until the management agrees to sit down with us and makes offers that we can take to the community.

“We were here last Wednesday and there was an undertaking we would meet with the management and a representative of the clients (Reddy), but that meeting never happened,” said Silangwe.

The Mercury