Durban - South Africa could lose almost 5.7 million jobs in the next five years to digital automation.This is according to the Managing Director for Accenture Consulting in Africa, Dr Roze Phillips 

While automation is a threat to manual labour jobs, also at risk are bookkeeping, accounting and auditing jobs, which are at the highest risk of automation. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Phillips said her research clearly showed that occupations that allocate more time to human-like activities have a lower probability of automation while workers involved in occupations such as production, office administration, tellers, cashiers, farming, food preparation, accounting, auditing, insurance claims and policing processing clerks, construction, mining, transportation, installation and maintenance are at highest risk

With 35% of all jobs at risk of total digital automation, the country could see a crippling effect compounded by a fragile economy and growing unemployment.

“With the threat of automation growing, South Africa is less prepared than other countries and needs to give its workforce skills to participate in the digital economy. In a country with a staggering 27.7% unemployment and jobless youths making up 75% of unemployment, the future looks bleak,” said Phillips. 

This can be cut down from 5.7 to 2.5 million if  South Africa doubles the pace at which its workforce acquires skills relevant for human-machine collaboration.

 

Phillips said in a country where poverty remains, rates of unemployment is high and social security questionable, it’s vital for the country to upskill its people to collaborate with machines to enhance their own productivity, not job losses.

 

“Machines do not consume things and whilst they can replace human work, they do not drive purchasing behaviour or contribute to GDP. Society will regress if humans can’t work, earn and spend. South Africa needs to learn how to ‘run with machines,” she said. 

 

She believes that digital technology will usher in a new economic era, and for South Africa to rise to the challenge the country needs to re-calibrate its economy and its workforce for digital, creating entirely new products, services and markets. 

The Mercury