Durban - EThekwini municipality chief financial officer Krish Kumar has defended the city’s continued trade with some companies implicated in tender irregularities, saying the city has to follow “all due administrative processes” before these companies can be blacklisted.
His comments come in the wake of reports that one of the companies implicated in the R36 million Urine Diversion (UD) toilet scandal continues to be awarded tenders from the city, despite the City’s Integrity and Investigations Unit (CIIU) recommending that the company be blacklisted.

The CIIU had recommended that the company be blacklisted after it found irregularities in the contract for the supply of 2200 UD toilets to rural and semi-rural wards in eThekwini. The investigation had found that four companies were paid in full for the supply of the toilets despite not even one of these having been delivered when the investigation was concluded.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Speaking at the meeting of the city’s executive committee, Kumar said according to an opinion received from the city’s legal unit, the city can only stop doing business with a company once that company has been blacklisted by the blacklisting committee.

“A CIIU report is a recommendation, it does not say you must act on it If the company is not blacklisted and the work has been done, we have to pay. Unless there is a Sars investigation that stops you from paying, that is the only time we can do that,” he said.

Kumar said there is a company that has threatened a civil lawsuit against the municipality for having blacklisted it. 

The issue has recently dominated headlines as many of the leaked investigations into tender irregularities have recommended blacklisting the implicated companies.

Mayor Zandile Gumede said issues contained in the reports should be handled with care. 

“My worry is about the leaking of these reports while the relevant units are still dealing with them. 

“We also want to have a clear policy about who can talk on these issues publicly, because the media goes to Krish, they go the city manager and you end up contradicting yourselves,” she said.

The issue of the investigation reports being leaked to the media and the public has become a political hot potato at city hall, as some believe they are being leaked to destabilise the administration. 

Last week DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango handed over some of the reports to the Hawks, saying the city was reluctant to act on them.
The Mercury