Durban - The usual long winding queues at the Umgeni Home Affairs office were nowhere to be seen yesterday, during Minister Malusi Gigaba’s visit as part of the “war on queues” campaign.
At the weekend, Gigaba launched the campaign, which is aimed at eradicating long waits at Home Affairs within a year, by getting client contact centres working optimally through improving workflow, attending to the unstable computer system and beefing up communication with clients. 

The absence of queues surprised Greyville resident Veena Rampatha, who thought the office was closed. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I drive past everyday just to check how the queues are because I need to renew my passport.” 

But the queues were such a “nightmare” she had been forced to cancel a family holiday as renewing her passport had proved impossible. 

“I was actually considering paying an agency R1500 to do it for me. But I know there are also people who stand in the queues for you from 5am for R100. Apparently they phone you when it’s about to be your turn,” she said. 

For Siyabonga Gwala, waiting in the line was not his biggest concern. 

The 24-year-old has been to various home affairs offices trying to get an ID for seven years.

On his initial try as a Grade 10 pupil, he was told to come back with his parents. But his mother died when he was a toddler and he does not have a relationship with his father. 

By the time he got to Grade12, he still did not have an ID and was prevented from writing exams. 

“My life is stuck. I gave up on finishing school, but I can’t give up on trying to find work because I need to eat. I can’t continue being a nobody, without an ID it’s like I don’t exist.”

Frustrated and desperate, Gwala approached the minister yesterday, pleading for him to intervene. 

Gigaba later said about Home Affairs officials: “In some instances there isn’t sufficient compassion for people who bring problems to us. 

“I have said that these people must not leave these offices until their problems have been resolved. Difficult as some of the problems are, with a greater degree of compassion and more dedication, we can resolve their problems.”

Gigaba said he did not ever want to hear that there had been a suicide or any other such “radical measure” by a person who was frustrated by Home Affairs. Not when the department had the “capability to resolve their problems and provide them with direction in their lives,” said Gigaba. 

Gigaba also visited Pietermaritzburg home affairs yesterday. Both that centre and Umgeni are among those earmarked for immediate intervention to reduce waiting times and the public having to wait outside. 

Leon and Caleigh Marais were relieved to not have to wait outside at Umgeni yesterday. 

The couple were there to apply for a passport for their 14-month-old daughter, Kiara. 

Although they live in Kloof, they bypassed the Pinetown Home Affairs office after hearing countless stories about muggings and the other crimes outside that office. 

“We heard this was a bigger venue, so even if there were queues, there was a bigger chance we would be queuing inside.”

They had previously gone to the Prospecton office, but after waiting for five hours, were told the system was offline. 

This meant a wasted day for the self-employed medical professionals, who both have to be present for the passport application. 

The unreliable network was one of the issues raised by staff to Gigaba yesterday. 

In response, Gigaba said: “We need to assist our officials, they work very hard and under very difficult circumstances. 

“Our equipment has to be operational. 

“Our network must be reliable If those things are done, we will see a drastic improvement in the quality of services that Home Affairs provides. 

“I have confidence in the officials and those that are a problem will be performance-managed out,” he said.
The Mercury