Durban - A Reservoir Hills woman is lucky to be alive after a robber’s gun failed - not once, but three times - to discharge as he tried to shoot her during a home robbery.
The incident took place at about 1.30pm on Wednesday when three robbers broke into the home in Karley Close.

Blue Security community and media liaison officer Andreas Mathios said the woman encountered the intruders after she went outside to investigate after hearing noises.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“A suspect with a firearm ambushed her and pointed his weapon at her, ordering her to go back inside. The woman refused to comply, angering her assailant, who threatened to shoot her. He pulled the trigger three times and nothing happened,” Mathios said.

According to Mathios, a fight then broke out between the intruders and the woman before they overpowered her and went into the house. 

“They grabbed three cellphones and fled the scene quickly because the resident was screaming to alert her neighbours to the incident,” Mathios said, adding that the victim had sustained minor injuries.

Meanwhile, in the neighbouring suburb of Westville, crime was said to be escalating. 

eThekwini deputy mayor Fawzia Peer said residents were living in fear after a spate of brazen house break-ins. 

“It is really escalating, it even happened in my house. The crime is increasing, I would say Westville is under siege,” she said.

Last week, two intruders were found inside Peer’s garden despite the home being guarded by two Metro police officers and secured with a 3.5m wall lined with razor wire.

Peer said she was worried that criminals targeting homes in Westville seemed to be getting more aggressive.

“They are just breaking down doors. Even in my case they were ready to take out the crowbar. This is now a community leaving in fear. People are just selling their houses.”

Last week, Peer held a meeting with the provincial police and the metro police on the matter. 

Last night, the residents were due to meet the police to seek solutions to crime in 
the area.

Peer, however, emphasised that a joint effort between residents, the community policing forum and the police was needed to combat crime. 

“We cannot point fingers at the police alone. This is a joint effort. It is impossible to have a police officer in every street and on every corner. There are some people talking about satellite stations but look at Glebelands, we have a satellite station there but people are still getting killed. 

“We must partner with the police and take charge of our communities,” she said. 
The Mercury