Cape Town - In less than six months, mayor Patricia de Lille’s career has been mired in controversy and she faces the prospect of losing her job.
This is how it all went wrong.



September

De Lille’s troubles started when the City’s Special Investigative Unit was shut down. It was under control of 
JP Smith, mayoral committee member for safety, security and social services.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Soon after the closure of the unit, a spat started between her and Smith.
RELATED: EXCLUSIVE: #DeLille's upgrades all above board



October

The spat continued, but this time letters and complaints were sent to DA leader Mmusi Maimane. The DA also launched its investigation.

At the same time, the ANC received news of possible irregularities of upgrades to De Lille’s home and protests outside her house. Documents shown to the Cape Argus showed the City paid for security upgrades while other construction work was paid for by De Lille.
AT THE GATES: Mayor Patricia de Lille speaks to the Cape Argus about the allegations surrounding upgrades to her home in Pinelands. Picture: David Ritchie/African News Agency/ANA


November

Craig Kesson, a director in De Lille’s office, alleged she covered up corruption to the tune of R33million involving the City’s transport commissioner, Melissa Whitehead.

The DA continued with its investigation and the City administration, after approval by council, appointed an independent investigator.

The DA slammed De Lille’s claims she was under political attack as 
“patently nonsense” and ordered her to give reasons she should not be fired.
A voice clip exposing the negative sentiments of a “minority group” within the DA unhappy with mayor Patricia de Lille, has laid bare the party’s simmering divisions.
RELATED: WATCH: Embattled De Lille turns to prayer before DA decides her fate



December

Investigations into the allegations concluded and corruption and maladministration was uncovered.

De Lille slammed the investigations as incorrect and prejudicial. At the same time, she  was given an extension to give reasons why she should not be fired.
ON THE ROPES: Mayor Patricia de Lille was invited by the World Harvest Christian Ministry church to their service in Langa to address the congregation and to be prayed for yesterday morning. Hours later her party’s top brass announced that she would be formally charged.Picture: David Ritchie/African News Agency/ANA


January

The full council deliberated on the investigative reports and decided a further investigation was needed.

The report, compiled by Bowman Gilfillan, was slammed again by De Lille, with threats to take it on judicial review if not corrected. 

The DA decided on her future on Sunday, and will press charges. “The federal executive has thus resolved that the mayor be formally charged and investigated by the party’s federal legal commission,” DA leader Mmusi Maimane said.
 @JasonFelix
 jason.felix@inl.co.za
Cape Argus