Nal’ibali’s World Read Aloud Day is becoming one of the biggest literacy drives in South Africa, reaching thousands of children and adults every year in its bid to raise awareness of the importance of reading aloud for children’s literacy development and school success. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Taking place on Thursday February 1, the campaign is calling on the nation’s support as it aims to break its read-aloud record by reaching one million children or more across the country. 
The event, which follows the release of the results of a global literacy study revealing the true magnitude of SA’s literacy crisis, holds a special significance not only as a milestone for the Nal’ibali campaign, but as an opportunity for all South African adults to take action as they grapple with the news that 78% of Grade 4 children in SA cannot read for meaning in any language. 
Picture: Supplied

Nal’ibali managing director, Jade Jacobsohn, said: “Reading aloud, and particularly in home languages, is one of the most important things caregivers can do for their children. By exposing them to the sophisticated words and language not common in conversation, this simple activity helps young children, and even babies, build a strong language foundation and develop their vocabularies.” 
And, because most of children’s early school learning takes place verbally and in their mother tongues, regular exposure to books and stories in home languages can provide them with an early academic boost that will see them right through their school years, sparking not only their minds and imaginations, but their curiosity and emotional development too. 
Every year Nal’ibali celebrates World Read Aloud Day by commissioning a new story and translating it into all 11 official languages, before asking South Africans to join them in reading it aloud to the children in their lives. 
Photo by Alexander Dummer on Unsplash

This year, the special story has been written by acclaimed South African author, Zukiswa Wanner.


Those wishing to participate in Nal’ibali’s World Read Aloud Day can visit their website to download the official story in any official SA language and pledge the number of children they will be reading to. Participants are also encouraged to share pictures of their read-aloud sessions on Nal’ibali’s Facebook and Twitter platforms and use the hashtag #WRADChallenge2018 on the day. 

The Mercury