Protesters trying to gain access to Gateway’s H&M store on Tuesday were escorted off the premises by police and mall security.
The large crowd, dressed in EFF regalia, had gathered outside the store, which had been shut down and locked. Videos online showed heavily armed guards and police calmly escorting the large crowd out of the mall – without incident.
Scenes from other EFFprotests across the country. Picture: Thobile Mathonsi (ANA)


The action comes after protests at the Swedish retailer’s stores in Gauteng in retaliation to its online ad campaign, which featured a little black boy wearing a hoodie with the words, “coolest monkey in the jungle”, emblazoned across the front of the 
garment.

On Saturday, EFF members stormed the retailer’s stores in upmarket malls in Pretoria, Joburg and Cape Town, upending racks and pushing over shop mannequins.

EFF national chairperson Dali Mpofu said in an interview with eNCA on Monday evening that the party would continue to take action against the clothing brand. “We have committed to address the undying scourge of racism, the racism that black people experience every day in this 
country.”
EFF members protested against an allegedly racist slogan by Swedish retailer H&M. Picture: Jason Boud/African News Agency/ANA

READ: EFF warns H&M in Menlyn Mall: Reopen and we will back

The retailer said in a statement on Tuesday night that the recent incident had been "entirely unintentional" but it demonstrated clearly how big our responsibility is as a global brand and how sensitive and mindful we need to be about different cultures and particularly about issues of race.
"We would also like to apologise sincerely to our employees, many of whom were placed in highly stressful situations in the wake of protest action. It has been a difficult and challenging week for H&M but we remain fully committed to our South African operation."

But, said Mpofu, they would be taking further steps through the courts, Parliament and through protest action to hold H&M to account.
Clothing racks, mannequins and mirrors were broken by angry EFF protesters in Gauteng. Picture: Supplied


“We need to make an example of them.”

The shopping centre’s PR team hadn’t responded by the time of going to press.

Police said that no incidents had been reported.

Blue Security’s Andreas Mathios said the protesters had peacefully left the 
premises when asked to by police, but the store remained closed.

“There was no violence on the premises. They did not gain entry to the store,” he said.
The Mercury