The ANC in KwaZulu's new leadership structure has just been announced.

The provincial task team was announced at a briefing called by the party's national executive committee on Tuesday afternoon. 

Mike Mabuyakhulu, who was once the province's Economic Development MEC was announced as the task team's convener and current Economic Development MEC and former ANC provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala was named as the co-ordinator.

The task team has been formed after a group of ANC members took the party to court and won a Pietermaritzburg High Court judgment which nullified the 2015 provincial elective conference. T

This effectively disbanded the Provincial Executive Committee.


However the PEC sought leave to appeal the decision while the ANC members who took the matter to court sought a declaratory order that the PEC vacate its office.

The high court granted the PEC leave to appeal and at the same granted the declaratory order that the PEC leave office.



Mike Mabuyakhulu


The PEC said it believed the Pietermaritzburg High Court erred in its judgment, especially on the interpretation of the ANC constitution, and believed that a higher court might find in its favour.


As a result of the court action, the national executive committee recently resolved that the PEC should be suspended and a provincial task team (PTT) be installed that will be tasked with convening a provincial elective conference within three months.

ANC secretary general Ace Magashule announced the members of the provincial task team that will take over the running of the province on Tuesday afternoon. 

"All of us including the province agree we need to find a political situation. Once the PEC appeals, that appeal suspends the court judgment which might take time to reach finality. We also agreed at the national conference in December to resolve our problems internally. All agreed it is in the interest of the ANC to suspend the PEC." 

Magashule said a suspension of the PEC was different from a dissolution and the latter would have meant it would have taken nine months before a provincial conference could be held. 

"The provincial conference must be held between March and April."


The task team includes: 

Mike Mabuyakhulu

Sihle Zikalala 

Willies Mchunu

Peggy Nkonyeni

Maggie Govender

Super Zuma

Mluleki Ndobe

Cyril Xaba

Nomusa Dube

Nhlakanipho Ntombela

Bheki Mtolo

Mxolisi Kaunda

Mdumiseni Ntuli

Gugu Simelane Zulu

Bongi Moloi

Makhosi Ntuli

The structure will be supported by the following NEC members

Edna Molewa

Lindiwe Sisulu

Candith Mashego

Dakota Lekgoete

Sibongile Besani