Durban - A bouncer told the Durban Regional Court of his efforts to save Irishman John King, who died outside a Durban nightclub nine years ago.
 
“I just couldn’t give up on him,” Colin Sillifant said on Tuesday.
 
Sillifant took the stand in the trial of Travis Nel - accused of beating King to death that night - as it got into its second day.
 
Sillifant was a bouncer at Eighties nightclub and said he knew Nel.
 
He told the court he knew him from the club, which he frequented, and that Nel had “worked a few shifts” there.
 
But, he said, he had not seen Nel that night.
 
“I was standing at the door and out of the corner of my eye, I saw someone being carried out,” he told the court.
 
He went to help.
 
“I grabbed his feet and we carried him downstairs,” he said. “I set him up against a wall … When I moved away, he made a very high pitched sound - like air escaping from his windpipe.”
 
Sillifant said upon realising that King was no longer breathing, he began trying to resuscitate him. He continued until an ambulance arrived.
 
“But I was unsuccessful,” he said.
 
A man who says he saw Nel punch King also took the stand on Tuesday.
 
Hermanus Johannes Ian Swart told the court he first saw Nel at One Stop - a bar at the stadium - earlier that night.
 
Later, he said, he saw him at Eighties. He told the court he saw Nel punch King in the jaw.
 
Swart said King then fell, hit his neck against a couch and slammed into the floor. During cross-examination, though, Swart asked for a break to collect himself.
 
His testimony is expected to resume today.
 
King was found dead on the morning of August 2, 2009, outside what was then the Eighties nightclub, after a rugby match at Kings Park rugby stadium.
 
He was initially thought to have died of natural causes, but a post mortem revealed the cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head.
 
King, who was from Ireland, was in South Africa on business at the time.
 
Nel, who is from South Africa but lives in the UK, was also here visiting.
 
Nel pleaded not guilty, as proceedings got under way on Monday morning.
 
His attorney, Carl van der Merwe, said his client denied assaulting King.
 
The Mercury