Durban - The search for those responsible for an overhead bridge rock-throwing incident - which led to the death of two siblings - has not yet yielded any arrests, despite the reward for any information growing to R250 000.
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala told The Mercury on Monday that police were appealing to the public for any information in connection with the incident. “Investigations are continuing but no arrests have yet been made.”

Amina Haffejee, 16, and her 7-year-old brother, Abdur Raheem, were killed in the incident on the N2 near Ballito on Wednesday last week. 
Read more: Woman, brother killed after boulder 'thrown' on N2

The deaths sparked discussions about covering bridges over major freeways, a suggestion the South African National Roads Agency said was not feasible.

The tragedy also prompted Dean Macpherson - DA member of Parliament and constituency head for the iLembe area which includes Ballito and Stanger - to offer a R5000 reward for any information that would help bring those responsible for the deaths to justice.

Macpherson told The Mercury’s sister newspaper, the Independent on Saturday, that the incident had brought back memories of his stepmother Debby Macpherson’s encounter with rock throwers.

He said a few years ago, rocks were thrown at her car while she was travelling near the Blackburn bridge on the N2 between uMhlanga and Sibaya. She managed to speed off.

He also invited others to contribute to the reward.
Also read: R100 000 reward for information on N2 boulder tragedy

“I have been extremely saddened after the death of the two young children. This has to be one of the most barbaric incidents I have ever come across and I cannot stand by idly while these heartless killers roam the streets.”

He encouraged businesses in the area and Durban metro to “come to the table” and contribute towards the reward.

Macpherson told The Mercury on Monday that with the help of individuals and corporates the reward had grown to R250000.

“The response has been overwhelming, with many appalled this could have happened to this family.”

He said the devastated family had been overwhelmed at the outpouring of support.

“I have been in contact with police and a private investigator but they still have not made any arrests.

“We suspect that the culprits are part of a group, so we are hoping one of them comes forward.

“We must work together as a community to seek justice for the family that has experienced the most horrendous tragedy as we continue to pray for them during this time,” Macpherson said.

* Anyone with information about the incident should contact the SAPS.

To make a contribution to the reward, contact Macpherson on 083 776 0202 or e-mail him at dean@eduform.co.za

The Mercury
