Gupta-linked companies McKinsey and Trillian will today (Tuesday) be handed an order to freeze R1.6 billion worth of their assets after the National Prosecuting Authority was granted the order on Monday.NPA spokesperson Luvuyo Mfaku on Monday confirmed that the preservative orders freezing the companies’ assets was obtained by the Asset Forfeiture Unit (AFU) in December.It is understood that the preservation order was brought by the AFU on the basis that the assets were the proceeds of crime. In these types of applications, the preserved assets are placed under the control of a curator and cannot be disposed of pending the final determination from the court on whether it they should confiscated.Mfaku refused to comment further on the nature and scope of the application due to issues of legality and said the NPA would release a full statement on Tuesday after the companies have been served with papers. However the R1.6bn amount is the same amount of money Eskom demanded that the companies pay back last year.Eskom issued a letter of demand to the two firms last October for the repayment of the funds for an unlawful consultancy contract.The letter of demand also stated that there could be criminal charges "against implicated parties", including theft, fraud and corruption.A Treasury instruction stipulated that Eskom should have paid McKinsey and Trillian an hourly rate, but instead the companies were paid a percentage of savings achieved, allowing fees to grow astronomically.Eskom stated that McKinsey received two unlawful payments totalling R1.028bn and Trillian, "with the consent of both McKinsey and Trillian" received four payments totalling R564.6m.These were raised as suspicious, based on information in the State of Capture report and subsequent Guptaleaks emails which pointed to alleged relationships between Eskom senior officials and the Gupta family.Gupta family associate Salim Essa was once a director of Trillian but has since resigned.It has been alleged that McKinsey partnered with Trillian to obtain consultancy work from Eskom due to the latter's links to the Gupta family and that Trillian was paid despite not doing any work.Both McKinsey and Trillian have denied wrongdoing.Responding to South Africans witnessing, for the first time, probable action against state capture, legal analyst Paul Hoffman said it was long overdue. “This should have happened a long, long time ago. This is part of the machinery that can be used by an effective, anti-corruption body that can go after those who are politically connected,” Hoffman said. Although McKinsey and Trillian are known Gupta-linked companies, Hoffman questioned why the AFU did not “go after” the Gupta family directly. He said he hoped that the unit was also working on obtaining an order against them and President Jacob Zuma's son, Duduzane Zuma. The South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) said their lawyers worked with the AFU in obtaining the order. In October, the federation laid criminal charges against Trillian and its shareholders. It said it had  been aware of the order since last year but had kept mum to allow the tracing of assets to take place effectively. It expressed concern at the delay in the execution of the order given that it was granted in December. It called on the curator to “move with all due speed”.“The order granted against McKinsey and Trillian is the result of constant pressure by Saftu and the good work of honest AFU lawyers and investigators. It is the beginning of the closing of the net…” the federation said in a press release yesterday. Saftu, however, said that this was not evidence of NPA boss Shaun Abrahams’ work but rather occurred despite him.“We are outraged that the NPA and Hawks have still made no progress with the criminal prosecutions. The AFU team has only been on board since late 2017,” the federation said. The court action was welcomed by political parties yesterday with the IFP's Narend Singh saying it was "about time". "It seems the new leadership of the ANC is cracking the whip, especially the new president Cyril Ramaphosa. This is something that should have been done a long time ago."Singh said he hoped the parliamentary commission inquiry into Eskom and the judicial commission of inquiry into state capture would unearth more evidence.DA MP Glynnis Breytenbach said this was a result of pressure and hard work of the AFU team under advocate Knox Molelle.She said the preservation order is only the first step in holding those responsible for looting the people’s money. "We expect to see other such action against the president’s son, Duduzane Zuma, and the president himself."Political analyst Ralph Mathekga said this latest action by the AFU and NPA was a huge boost for newly-elected ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa.“This says that he is in charge and this thing is unravelling. [President Jacob] Zuma just had no interest,” he said.