Durban - Members of the SAPS Rescue, Tactical Response and Training Unit, as well as its Vehicle Identification and Safeguarding Unit, have been evicted from their Marburg offices on the South Coast in terms of a court order secured by the property owner.
The police units, which serve the entire Umzimkhulu area, including Port Shepstone, have until late January to move out of the offices owned by Silvermoon Investments.

In a recent judgment, the Durban High Court ordered that should the police units fail to vacate the premises within 30 days, the sheriff is ordered to evict them. 
The police and public works departments have also been ordered to pay the costs of the court application. 
It was opposed by the SAPS, which called for the dismissal of the application.

Silvermoon Investments approached the court after the police failed to leave the premises after it had issued a notice to vacate last February.
When there was no move by the police units, Silvermoon Investments erected a billboard stating that the property had been “hijacked” by the Department of Public Works for the SAPS and called it the South African government’s first land grab.
In her judgment, Judge Mokgere Masipa said that Silvermoon Investments had set out a fairly simple case proving its ownership of the property, and had indicated that the property was occupied by the police units at the instance of the Department of Public Works, which is in charge of procuring property that is to be used by state organs.

According to the judgment, there was one lease agreement that was concluded between the property owner and the police and Public Works, which ended in December 2017.
In dispute was whether the property owner had signed a second lease which was to end in September this year.
The court found that there were conditions attached to the second lease that were not fulfilled and which rendered the contract void.

Therefore the property owner was within his rights to ask the police to vacate.
According to the judgment the parties had an acrimonious relationship with Public Works, claiming that rent had been overpaid due to incorrect property size estimates and a counter-­claim by the property owner that rent had not been paid.
The judgment said those issues were still pending and could not be decided by the court.

The Mercury