Durban - Four 19-year-old former Westville Boys’ High School pupils threw caution to the wind and put themselves at risk last week to help members of the Mountain Club of SA rescue two hikers who were struck by lightning in the southern Drakensberg.
Roger Byrne and his nephew Jonathan Esteves were both struck by lightning while hiking with three other relatives on the Giant’s Cup Trail above the Sani Pass road.

Byrne, 57, a teacher from Howick, was severely injured, while his 25-year-old nephew was struck by a secondary bolt of lightning. Both men are scheduled for surgery this week at Mediclinic Hospital in Pietermaritzburg.
Jonathan Ross, Rorke Lilford, Tristan Baldwin and Mason du Plessis had just finished hiking the Giants Cup Trail and were having supper when the life-threatening incident occurred.
“I asked (a paramedic) about the situation, and if there was anything we could do to help,” said Ross, a first-year medical student at the University of Pretoria.

He said the thought of being struck by lightning did cross their minds as they made their way to the scene with the rescue team.
“At the end of the day, we all knew that this was not about us and that we had a job to do; there was no time for doubt and hesitation, the clock was ticking.” 
He said as fellow hikers, they were adamant that it was their duty to help those injured on the trail. 

“There are times in life when all you have to do to make a difference is say ‘yes’, and this was one of those instances,” Ross said.
The members of the mountain club rescue team ensured that everyone had suitable gear, to ensure those assisting “would be helpful without being a hazard”.
“There were still ominous-looking storm clouds in the area and the rescue team warned us that heavy rain and thundershowers were forecast for the evening.

“When it began to rain hard the ground became very slippery and it was a battle not to trip and fall while carrying one of the stretchers.
“We all took turns on either side of the stretcher, which required six people to keep it stable, and one person to guide it from behind,” Ross said.
It was obvious the injured men were in a lot of pain.

“However, they were also concerned for our safety, with the storm still in the area.”
Baldwin, a first-year BCom student at the University of Pretoria, said the real heroes of the rescue were the mountain rescue volunteers.
“Their bravery has inspired me to get involved with the Mountain Club of South Africa in any way I can,” he said. First-year chemical engineering student Lilford said it was comforting to know there were members of mountain-rescue teams who risked their lives to help others.

“This group of individuals volunteer their time and expertise to these rescue missions and often place themselves in extreme danger to help those in need, and I consider it a great privilege to have helped alongside such a great group of people,” he said. 
Du Plessis, a first-year law student, said the calming presence of the mountain rescue team helped the four friends not to “get flustered”. 
“We all understood that we were not the professionals. We stayed out of the way of the efficient team and only assisted when given orders,” he said. All four young men praised the rescue team and sent their best wishes to the men they helped to save.

“Tristan, Rorke, Jonathan and I would all like to give our deepest wishes of good health to both Roger and his nephew,” said Du Plessis.
The Mercury