Durban - Thirty-six unlicensed car guards and their employer were arrested and taken in for questioning, during a joint operation by the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (Psira) and police, at shopping malls in Durban on Monday.
After receiving complaints of car jamming and the possibility of car guards being party to these crimes, Psira conducted operations at Windermere Centre in Morningside, China Mall in Springfield Industrial Park and Sanlam Centre in Pinetown.

Velisile Bukula, Psira spokesperson, confirmed that all the unregistered car guards were employed by the same company.
“We are standing at 34 foreign nationals from Burundi, Nigeria, Congo and one South African, plus their employer,” said Bukula. 
Regional Psira manager, Talent Zwane, said the car guards were interviewed by Psira inspectors and found to be unregistered.

She said the the employer would be charged with deploying foreigners as car guards.
“Since we have identified that the car guards’ documentation is fraudulent, they will be charged with contravening the Psira Act and fraud,” said Zwane. “We are still verifying their status in the country,”she said.
One male car guard, who was personally checked by Zwane, was found to have the details of a female with a criminal record, while another stated he was 24 years old, but his certificate reflected he was born in 1974.

“When we checked some of the documentation, it appears the Psira certificates were dated prior to them entering the country,” said Zwane.
Psira-registered car guards must have a certificate and card, said Zwane.
“Upon inspection, they must be able to produce their small white Psira card, which includes their name, surname, Psira logo and number, as well as identity number,” she said.

Zwane added that anyone could register with Psira if they had the proper documentation and fingerprints were provided to conduct criminal checks.
Zwane warned vehicle owners to be extra vigilant during the busy festive season and not leave valuables in their vehicles.
“People must be vigilant and make sure that their cars are properly locked and mall owners must make sure that they hire the services of registered car guards,” said Zwane.

During Monday's operation:
* Nine car guards and their employer were arrested at Windermere Centre.
* Nineteen car guards were arrested at China Mall in Springfield Industrial Park. 

* Seven guards were arrested at Sanlam Centre.
The Mercury