Durban - The Advertising Regulatory Board’s (ARB) recent ruling, which dealt with complaints about KFC Crunchmaster burgers television ad, found that South Africans can take a joke.
The commercial is set in what appears to be a government office, where people are waiting in queues while public servants are behind closed windows, eating the advertised product.

After taking a bite of the burger, the workers have a very loud conversation, that the waiting people can hear. 
In the advert one of the characters say to the other: “Let’s tell them there’s no power. They must come back tomorrow.”
The other character screams out: “But tomorrow is a public holiday!” The first character says: “I know.” 

At this point, both characters burst out laughing.
A third character joins in and says: “Just tell them the system is offline,” and they all burst out laughing - all of which the waiting people hear. 
KFC said the ad was based on a human truth involving loud noise and how it can throw out the equilibrium in people’s eardrums, causing them to speak louder than they normally would. 

With the new KFC Crunchmaster, the goal of the ad was to expound on just how crunchy it is, it said. 
The advertising agency decided to exaggerate the sound factor to depict the level of crunchiness.
The complainants in the matter, Rhoda Heyns and Marlene Krynauw, took offence at the ad. 

The duo argued that the behaviour of having computer systems down and sending the public home without being served, was a reality in the country that should not be encouraged by advertisements. 
In her submission to the ARB, Heyns said advertisements should convey positive messages.
Krynauw submitted that the commercial was a “serious violation” of the South African public and that the food-outlet was “taking the mickey out of the waiting crowd”.

The ARB found the essence of Heyns and Krynauw’s complaints were discomfort with a situation that was real and upsetting. 
“The advertiser recognises this in their response, saying that it was common cause in South Africa that waiting in long queues for any form of service delivery was an accepted norm. The question is whether making light of this is offensive,” the ruling read. 
The ARB said there were certain everyday life challenges that affected South Africans that could not be glamorised or satirised under any circumstance, such as sexual violations, human trafficking and murders.

“However, there are other situations that are fodder for much humour. Many South Africans consider our ability to laugh at ourselves as one of our defining positive characteristics as a nation. 
“The directorate is of the opinion that the challenge of waiting in a queue, only to be told that the system is down, falls squarely into the category of challenges that can be satirised and joked about,” the ruling read. 
The Mercury