2018 HAS been eventful and largely stressful for a lot of South Africans, but not for these entertainers who have blossomed this year.
We caught up with some local artists to reflect on their year and to share how they would be spending Christmas.

Durban’s TDK Macassette, 26, also known as the “Gqom Barbie”, not to be mistaken with Babes Wodumo (“Gqom Queen”), launched herself into the music industry with her Barbie-girl look and banging gqom lyrics after signing a deal with Universal Records this year.
“2018 has been filled with blessings. I still can’t believe it because it’s only been about eight months in the spotlight and the support from people like DJ C’ndo and Universal has been amazing,” she said.
TDK, who was born as Thandeka Mkhwanazi, released several hits, including Domoroza, and featured in the initial version of a hit song.

 
 
  TDK Ma Cassette
 

She will spend her church-filled Christmas with her family in Durban, with the family attending Christmas mass and also hosting their own service at home. And then there’s the food, with chicken, turkey and beef on the menu.
“My speciality is the simple stuff. I make a bomb beef and chicken curry, and maybe some salads, nothing else,” she said.
Later on Christmas Day, TDK and her entourage will perform at Durban Underground, which will be hosted by Eyadini Lounge in uMlazi this year.

Female rapper Moozlie, who released her debut album this year and won the best female award at the SA Hip Hop Awards this week, said: “My year has been so good, I feel super blessed. I won an award, so there are lots of highlights to take out of 2018.”
Moozlie, real name Nomuzi Mabena, plans to spend Christmas with her family at her grandmother’s house in the Vaal; this after her grandfather passed away earlier this year.
On Christmas evening, she will travel to eSwatini with King Deetoy to perform.

Her message to young people? “Be grateful. It’s so important to be grateful for all that you have, and appreciate everything you have while you push yourself to the next level,” she said.
5FM DJ Ms Cosmo said her 2018 was about self-reflection.
“I ended up changing my entire team, so that I worked with people who will understand my new vision and help me on that journey. Because I’ve done that and also because I can see that things are starting to pick up since I made that move, I’m quite looking forward to 2019,” she said.

 
 
  Ms Cosmo
 

Ms Cosmo, real name Nonqaba Nozuko Rwaxa, recently released a song titled 88 with rappers Kwesta, Solo and Kid X. The song pays homage to the four of them and all 30-year-olds born in the year 1988.
“I’m hoping to push out more music next year and I also want to focus on changing the industry. There is a need for change. What I’ve been doing is to try to get more girls in the industry and I’ve been doing this through my movement called #SheSocial, where once a month we give a platform and an opportunity for young girls to showcase what they can do,” she said.