Durban - The Mooi-Mpofana council has resolved to criminally charge those implicated in the looting of council funds.
The municipality also announced that it would institute financial recovery measures against those implicated.

The action is part of the recommendations contained in a forensic report that investigated the abuse of council resources. It was recently tabled by the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. The council had been given 21 days by the department to act.
Opposition party councillors have accused the council of dragging its feet in dealing with the allegations. They alleged that the council faced deep divisions, leading to absenteeism and preventing council sittings. 
“We have only gone as far as to note the recommendations of the report. Nothing concrete has been done to move the recommendations forward,” said IFP councillor Mthembeni Majola.

“The 21 days we were given are almost over. We are not likely to act because the council is divided. There are councillors who seem to sympathise with those accused of wrongdoing.
“When the investigation was proposed in December last year there was fierce opposition from some councillors, who said it was unnecessary. Now that it has laid bare the rot, there are still some councillors who refuse to accept the findings,” said Majola.
He said while mayor Xolani Duma was pushing the fight against corruption, he was alone with the opposition. 

The investigation into the affairs of the council found that millions of rand had been wasted on car hire - the contract was irregular and the council had overpaid by R15million.
It also found that a senior official had treated a municipal bank account as his private account, withdrawing council funds according to his personal financial circumstances.
DA councillor Nhlalayenza Ndlovu said the recommendations in the report had been adopted. “We have resolved to get a legal opinion to implement this without mistakes, as the report names people. Some might be arrested and we do not want to compromise that process,” he said.

The Mercury