Durban - The eThekwini Municipality says it is under no contractual obligation to supply millions of orange recycling plastic bags to a group of contractors who have taken the city to court over the matter.
In papers filed in the Durban High Court on Monday, the city said it had no contract with the parties and the orange plastic bag programme would resume once a new supplier had been appointed. The city was responding to an application brought by five contractors, once part of the orange bag recycling programme, who took the municipality to court last month to get it to provide them with bags.

In their application, the contractors said that they could not continue with the project if they were not given the recycling bags. They said that once they received the bags from the municipality, they distributed them to homes in their demarcated areas of operation. 
Once residents had placed their recyclables into the bags, the contractors collected them, took them to sorting areas and sold them to recycling companies.
The five contractors have warned that the continued stoppage of the award-winning programme would negatively affect residents and especially the municipality during the festive season, when the amount of household waste increased.

The contractors claimed they had suffered financial prejudice due to the municipality’s failure to supply them with the bags. 
However, the municipality said that before these contractors could seek an order of specific performance, they first needed to prove the existence of a contract that they sought to enforce. It conceded that while it had an agreement with one of the companies, this was for three years and concerned the establishment of community owned recycling projects in Isipingo Hills.
While the five companies had submitted a letter sent to them by the municipality, dated June 8, 2018, as evidence that a contract existed between them, the municipality stated that it was only addressed to one company and the others could therefore not rely upon it.

It stated which areas were to be serviced and what was required of the company over a period of three years.
However, the municipality disputed the validity of the letter, saying it “was not preceded by any procurement process and is in flagrant violation of Section 217 of the Constitution”.
The municipality further argued that if it were to meet the contractors’ demands, it would have to spend R70million on orange plastic bags over three years. It further contended that the manager who signed the letter had no authority to bind it to such a huge contract and that such action would have been in violation of the Municipal Finance Management Act and its supply chain management policy.

While the contractors had argued that the municipality was under obligation to supply residents with the orange bags because it already charged them for these, the city denied this in its papers, saying that the money collected from ratepayers was for refuse collection in its entirety. 
“Separation of refuse at source can take place even without orange plastic bags,” read their affidavit.
The municipality said the orange plastic bags were just a “convenient way to encourage the households to separate refuse at source in order to enable the applicants to collect such refuse to recycling companies for commercial gain.”

Problems over the supply of orange plastic bags dated back to 2015, when the city appointed a new service provider to supply these to the municipality. A forensic investigation later found that the R90 million tender was irregularly awarded to the winning bidder, Persian Star 11 CC.
Investigators had revealed that the company made misrepresentations while bidding for the contract and that it had lacked the technical knowledge and expertise that were required to fulfil its contractual obligations.
The awarding of the tender was now the subject of a probe by the Special Investigating Unit.

The municipality also wanted the application to be struck off the roll, saying it lacked urgency.
The Mercury