Durban - Durban is to get a new Catholic archbishop and the predictions are that he is likely to be as outspoken on current issues as the late Archbishop Denis Hurley.
“This is a man who has something to say,” said Raymond Perrier, director of the Denis Hurley Centre in Durban.

 The new archbishop (currently called a Coadjutor Archbishop-an archbishop in waiting) who will take up his duties next year, will be Abel Gabuza, 63, the current Bishop of Kimberley and chairperson of the Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference Peace and Justice Commission, who will succeed Cardinal Wilfrid Napier, 77, who is retiring.
 “For the first time in Southern African, the Pope has appointed a Coadjutor Archbishop. What this means is that the incumbent Archbishop is given an assistant who has the right to succeed as Archbishop on a date to be determined by the Holy Father Pope Francis,” the Cardinal explained yesterday.
“When Coadjutor Archbishop Abel Gabuza comes to Durban, he will be officially received at a liturgical celebration to be held on February 10 at a venue still to be determined….When he will take over officially will be announced by the Pope at a later date. This is a new system to us in southern Africa.”

Cardinal Napier, who succeeded Denis Hurley as Archbishop of Durban in 1992 and who was raised to the College of Cardinals in 2001, had tendered his resignation in 2016 on his 75th birthday in line with canon law which required him to step down on that birthday.
However, the Pope asked him to stay on for another two years and when that was up, to continue indefinitely.
Having previously worked with the incoming archbishop, Perrier said that he was impressed with Bishop Gabuza’s thoughtfulness and willingness to take a stand on issues.

“I have always been impressed with his strong public position. On questions of justice and peace, we look forward to more echoes of Archbishop Denis Hurley’s behaviour,” he said.
The incoming archbishop, who was born in Alexandra Township, Joburg, said yesterday that he was looking forward to coming to the Archdiocese of Durban, which would be bigger and very different to his rural diocese of Kimberley.
“I have given my life to the church and I believe there is a need for me to come to Durban. I suspect the authorities thought that I would be suited to Durban as there were other places that were vacant,” he said.

 Having served two terms on the Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference Peace and Justice Commission, he would no longer be eligible for election in the February elections, he said.
Asked if he would continue to be outspoken on issues, he said if there was a need, the moral voice of the church would be heard.
Paying tribute to Cardinal Napier, Perrier said that he had brought Christians and people of different faiths together.

He had shown his commitment to the poor as his legacy project will be the Napier Centre for Healing outside Verulam, an after-care facility for post-rehabilitation drug users from all religions, which will open next year.
“He could have chosen something fancy but he has chosen something for the people most neglected. I have walked the streets with him and he is amazing. He has a natural openness and can talk to anyone, making them feel worthy.”
The Mercury