Durban - Angry family members were camped out at the Gale Street mortuary on Tuesday, waiting for the bodies of their loved ones to be released.

Bheki Ndlovu, a grieving father who lost his 7-year-old daughter after she was electrocuted, has been waiting for 10 days for her body to be released.

“Every day for the last 10 days I’ve been coming here from uMbumbulu,” he said.

In addition to the funeral costs, Ndlovu has to fork out more money to come to Durban every day.

“The mortuary is on strike, no one is assisting, and it is very expensive to travel here every day. She was supposed to be buried last Sunday, but we are still waiting,” he said.

Zoleka Mayile of Flagstaff, Eastern Cape, was sent by her family to collect her brother’s body, after he was stabbed to death in Sydenham.

“Every day we come here, and they tell us they are on strike and can’t give us the body. My brother’s body is just lying here,” said Mayile.

She said the waiting added to the pain of losing her brother.

“It’s very painful to lose someone, but it’s more painful if you don’t get a chance to bury that person,” said Mayile.

Thandiwe Zamisa of Khayelihle Funeral Homes in Pietermaritzburg said: “You can’t do anything without a post-mortem. This past weekend, about four funerals had to be cancelled. There are people waiting for up to three weeks for burials.”

 Meanwhile, the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health announced the arrest of 16 forensic pathology staff based at Durban’s Gale Street medico-legal mortuary.

This brings the total number of staff arrested this week to 32 after 16 confirmed arrests by SAPS yesterday at Fort Napier medico-legal mortuary in Pietermaritzburg. 
Health MEC Sibongiseni Dhlomo said those arrested on Monday, for failing to abide by a court order forcing them to end their illegal strike and return to work, were released yesterday on warning by the labour court.
“They were warned to either return to work, or risk re-arrest and expulsion,” said Dhlomo.

The National Education Health and Allied Workers Union’s regional secretary in the Harry Gwala region said the judgment was a victory in that the workers had to return to their original duties.
“This means those who had been appointed cleaners should go back to that. They should not cut up bodies as they do not get paid for that.”
The Mercury