Durban - The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal has rejected allegations that it is orchestrating a campaign to sabotage and take over IFP-run councils and has urged political parties to refrain from politicising criminal matters.
It said the accusations were an effort by opposition parties to garner political support in the run up to next year’s elections. 

The IFP and the DA pointed fingers at the ANC following the arrest of three ANC councillors who allegedly tried to bribe a DA councillor to vote with them to unseat IFP leaders running the Abaqulusi Municipality last week. The IFP runs Abaqulusi through a delicate coalition.
This, in the same week that Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube placed the Endumeni Municipality under administration.
The IFP lost control of Endumeni a few weeks ago after one of its councillors voted with the ANC, and he was appointed mayor. 

IFP leader Blessed Gwala alleged the ANC had begun an intensive campaign to persuade its ward councillors to resign from councils so that there will be vacancies, which will lead to by-elections. 
 “They entice our councillors by promising them financial rewards. The Abaqulusi case is similar to that of Endumeni Municipality where the IFP councillors were used by the ANC as a trojan horse,” he said.
DA leader Zwakele Mncwango echoed Gwala’s accusations. 

He said it seemed to be a national strategy as there were many municipalities, governed by the opposition, that are being “collapsed”. 
 “They (ANC) are intent on causing instability and taking over municipalities they do not control through the power of the administrators instead of negotiating coalitions. 
 “One of the people arrested for trying to bribe the DA councillor was a senior regional ANC leader in Abaqulusi region. Why is he involved in such matters if not with the blessing of the party,” Mncwango asked.

In response, ANC provincial spokesperson Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu said the arrests were a criminal matter and should be treated as such.
“Political parties should show restraint and not politicise criminal matters. If the IFP leader Gwala is making those accusations, we also know that the IFP has done a lot of things in ANC run councils,” she said without elaborating. 
Speaking on the arrests, she said the party would wait for the court process to unfold as it could not act against members on the basis of allegations. “Those members have been released on bail and we will be getting a briefing from regional leaders,” said Simelane-Zulu.

The Mercury