Durban - NTOKOZO Mthethwa, who was arrested in the Netherlands about five weeks ago after she was allegedly found in possession of heroin, says she did nothing wrong.
The 36-year-old, originally from KwaMashu, was subsequently sacked by the South African ambassador to Netherlands, Bruce Koloane, as a domestic worker at his official residence in The Hague, where she had been working since 2016.

“I did not do anything wrong. I’m here to work and support my family in Durban. My hands are clean. I don’t know who had delivered that thing to me,” she said.
Mthethwa said she was confident the court would clear her name. She was arrested at the Station Den Haag HS (Station Hollands Spoor) railway station.
“I’m going to comply with what the court orders me to do. I am not going to run away from the justice system,” she said.

Mthethwa said she went to the Netherlands in search of a better life. 
“I thought my life was changing for the better when I got a job at the residence of the ambassador, but now that’s been shattered.”
Talking about her future, she said she would continue to stay in the Netherlands and look for a job.

“This has become a second home for me. It’s difficult for me to leave,” said Mthethwa.
Frans Zonneveld, spokesperson for the Netherlands Public Prosecution Service, said if Mthethwa was found guilty, she could face between three and six months in jail. 
“There are no minimum sentences in our country. The judge takes into account all relevant factors. They have established informal non-binding guidelines. For a quantity between 200g and 500g, a prison sentence of three to six months is indicated,” he said.

Zonneveld said Mthethwa, who is out on bail, had been found with 470g of heroin and not 2.5kg, as previously reported.
The date for her trial is not known. She was released conditionally, said Zonneveld.
A South African living in the Netherlands since the 1990s said it would be difficult for her to be employed elsewhere if she was found guilty.

“Drugs are not a serious offence in the Netherlands, but if you are found guilty, then your life becomes a nightmare because no company will employ you if you have ‘drug charge cloud’ hanging above your head.”
Sunday Tribune