Durban - The vandalising of tender boxes at a municipal building on Friday has raised concerns over the breach of confidential information contained in documents that were found strewn outside.
The public has been urged to hand the documents over to the police if found.

Business forums, who were blamed for the vandalism, have distanced themselves from the incident.
A group of men allegedly stormed the municipality’s supply chain management (SCM) unit at the Engineering Building in Old Fort Road and vandalised the tender boxes. 
Tender documents which had been submitted by prospective contractors bidding for various contracts were strewn outside the building, forcing the municipality to restart its tender processes.

A source at the municipality said the men were believed to be aggrieved contractors who wanted to disrupt the process.
A video circulated on WhatsApp shows documents strewn on the road. The documents, according to one source, include confidential and sensitive information on pricing, copies of identity documents, tax clearance certificates and even bank statements.
A person can be heard in the video saying the incident meant a tender process had to start afresh. She then blamed it on the Delangokubona Business Forum, which in the past has been accused of disrupting construction sites and demanding tenders.

The president of the Federation for Radical Economic Transformation, Melusi Zondi, said the forum and its affiliates, which includes Delangokubona, had nothing to do with the incident.
“I have written to the city manager and to supply chain management to alert them that we were not part of that. We believe that those were just hooligans and the law must deal with them accordingly,” he said.
Zondi said the federation had launched its own investigation into the incident.

“We hope that they are identified and that the law deals with them. We regard such people as counter-revolutionaries. The federation and its affiliates have a panel which we use to engage the municipality on certain issues. So there is no need for any of us to engage in this type of behaviour,” he said.
In a statement issued on Friday, city manager Sipho Nzuza said the municipality had opened a case with the police and that CCTV footage was being used in the investigation.
He said the documents were “important and confidential”. 

The head of the SCM unit, Andre Petersen, said the opening of some tenders would be cancelled due to the incident.
“We are aware that certain tenders are affected by this incident and we will keep the public informed of the developments.This incident has hindered our processes and affected our timelines. We call on people to meet us if they face any challenges or need assistance.” 
The affected tenders include those for the maintenance and repair of sub-stations, the upgrade of a sewer, the distribution of the municipal newspaper, the construction of pavements and rehabilitation of a soccer field.

The Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry yesterday condemned the incident, saying it could have a negative impact on service delivery and dent the city’s image. 
“Senseless destructive and violent acts can damage not only property but also the reputation of the city and its citizens. This incident could have short- and long-term ripple effects on service delivery and the economy as it will certainly affect the processes and timelines of eThekwini’s supply chain management unit,” said chamber president Musa Makhunga.
He implored aggrieved parties to explore more peaceful means to address their grievances, adding that it was important that immediate action be taken to reduce the negative impact on the local community and businesses.

Bonke Dumisa, an economist and an advocate, said the eThekwini Municipality must “consciously go out of its way to identify and have the culprits arrested”.
On the confidential information being lost, Dumisa warned that anyone who obtained and used the information in any way would become an accessory to the fact.
“Anyone who gets hold of those documents is advised to take them to the police station and not use them.”

The Mercury