Durban - The African Christian Democratic Party has added its voice to the growing condemnation against the utterances of Black First Land First (BLF) leader Andile Mngxitama. The ACDP has further moved to press charges of racial hatred and incitement against Mngxitama. The party has also reported him to the Human Rights Council and Equality court.
Earlier this week, Mngxitama was blasted for making threats against white people. 

He had been speaking to supporters in Potchefstroom during the time of 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children, Mngxitama said about whites, “We’ll kill their children. We’ll kill their wives....We’ll kill their dogs. We’ll kill their cats.” 
ACDP leader, Reverend Kenneth Meshoe, said they strongly condemned Mngxitama's statement. 
Meshoe called Mngxitama "the enemy of peace and reconciliation”. 

He added that the BLF leader should be arrested and prosecuted for hate crimes.
"At a time when all South Africans should galvanise in coming together to fight poverty, inequality, unemployment, crime and the many other socio-economic challenges facing our nation, Mngxitama’s comments are fuel to incite violence and harm on others, based purely on the color of their skin. This hate speech borders on a call to commit genocide and cannot be left unchallenged,” Meshoe said. 
He added that there were many South Africans who fought for a fair, just, equitable and  non-racial society, one in which all South Africans, irrespective of their race, creed, religion or colour, could call home. 

“Mngxitama’s racist utterances are an attempt to take us back to the dark days of apartheid. He is an embarrassment to all who fought against racism, and opposed the evil of apartheid.
“Action must be taken against Mngxitama. We have a strong constitution and sufficient laws in our criminal justice system to bring the BLF leader to book. Failure to do so would make our constitution and other relevant laws, not worth the paper they are written on,” Meshoe said. 
The Democratic Alliance has also laid charges against Mngxitama. 

The Mercury