Durban - Police are clamping down on the drug trade in Sydenham.
Teams from the Hawks, the SAPS, the Durban metro police and national intervention raided five houses suspected of dealing in drugs in Sydenham yesterday. The operation started at about 6am and the road was closed until about midday.

Three people, including a 78-year-old man, were arrested and the law enforcement agencies recovered a significant amount of drugs, such as heroin, crack, cocaine and mandrax.
A police officer at the scene said the raid had been a long time coming as the police had been informed about the activities.
“This 78-year-old man has to be the oldest man I have ever arrested,” remarked one of the police officers at the scene.

“The information that we have is that he is very active in the drug trade. We found him with a lot of stuff, and when people call, he delivers,” said the officer. 
The officer said drug dealing was of serious concern in Sydenham, and the community felt too intimidated to co-operate with police. 
“The issue of drug dealing is very sensitive. The people are so scared they don’t even want to talk to us.” 

People in the community said they were shocked that drugs were being sold in their area. A few stood on the balconies of their homes and watched the spectacle play out. 
“We woke up at 5 in the morning and the road had been closed. We were not sure what was happening. It’s quite worrying that drugs could be sold here,” said one resident. 
Ward councillor Chris Pappas said the drug problem has been a huge challenge. “In every community policing forum meeting, the issue of drugs comes up.”

He said the situation had worsened recently as a turf war had broken out between rival gangs at Sydenham Heights. “One of the gangs is called The Capetonians and they brought reinforcements from Cape Town.
“A few months ago, there was a shootout between the gangs. Even the police were shot at. It’s common knowledge that the base of the drug operations is Sydenham Heights, but the big bosses live in Westville,” he said. 
Metro police spokesperson Parboo Sewpersad said they would continue with such operations to purge drug dealing in and around Durban.

Sewpersad said eThekwini deputy mayor Fawzia Peer had formed a task team within the metro unit to deal specifically with drug dealing.
Attempts to reach her yesterday were unsuccessful.
Police did not respond to requests for comment yesterday and attempts to reach the Hawks weren’t successful.

The Mercury