Durban - Two grieving fathers whose sons were killed when soccer goalposts fell on them have joined forces to create awareness around safety measures to be taken at schools and sports clubs.
Sahil Singh’s son, Kiyan, 8, died instantly after a goalpost became airborne during strong winds, and hit him on the head earlier this month. 

At the time, Kiyan was standing on the sidelines of the field, near the post.
Singh said that in the days that followed the tragedy, he searched the internet to find out what could have been done to ensure his son’s safety. 
While searching, he found that another child, Hugo Paluch, 13, had died last year in a similar incident.

“I was shocked to discover that this incident happened recently and in South Africa. 
“People said Kiyan’s death was a freak accident, but I found that it happens so frequently internationally and then so recently here in our own country,” Singh said. 
He said it was Hugo’s father, Dov, who first contacted him to offer his condolences and share his story. 

Hugo, a pupil at Yeshiva College in Johannesburg, was injured when a goalpost fell on top of him while he was playing soccer with his classmates. He was hospitalised for 11 days and turned 14 in hospital, but died soon thereafter. 
Paluch said his family were still searching for answers as to how this tragedy could have occurred, because the school’s investigation proved futile. 
“It wasn’t the wind in Hugo’s case. It was lack of supervision. It was lack of checking the equipment. It was the possibility that the boys were being rough or playing rough around him and pushed over the goalpost,” he said. 

He said the school launched an investigation almost a year after the incident. 
“If my son’s death was taken seriously, Kiyan’s death would never have happened. In the space of just 18 months, two children have died in South Africa from goalpost incidents. How is this even possible? Were these both simply ‘freak’ accidents?” 
Singh said he and Paluch were trying to raise awareness around children’s safety on the sports field. 

He urged parents to demand a safe environment for their children. 
“I have another son who still plays soccer. If I see the goalposts aren’t fixed, he will not play. It is unacceptable and parents need to stand up and demand their children are kept safe,” Singh said. 
Paluch said the topic needed to be discussed often and in a serious manner. 

“After it happened to us, it should never have happened again. But it did. Hopefully this time, someone will listen,” he said. 
He said his family started an awareness initiative in his son’s memory called Hugo’s Heroes. Working with paramedics, children are taught first aid and other safety tips because they are often the first respondents to such incidents. 
The Mercury