Durban - The South African Weather Service has warned KZN residents to expect severe thunderstorms in the south of the province this evening, moving up the North Coast tomorrow.
The service forecasts heavy thunderstorms over southern Uthukela, Umgungundlovu, Umvoti, Ilembe, Ethekwini, Harry Gwala and Ugu today with possible hail, strong gusty winds and heavy downpours.

The heavy rainfall was expected over the northern parts of KZN on Saturday and could lead to flooding over parts of Mandeni, King Cetshwayo, Eastern Zululand, uMkhanyakude in the afternoon. Heavy rain is expected over Gauteng, Limpopo and Mpumalanga on Saturday into Sunday leading to flash flooding on Sunday.
SAWS said the heat wave with high temperatures would continue over northern KZN and that hot and humid weather will result in extremely uncomfortable conditions tomorrow.

 

A graph from AccuWeather showing expected Rainfall over the country on Friday.
DURBAN: It will be partly cloudy becoming cloudy in the afternoon with widespread showers and thundershowers. The wind will be moderate to fresh north-easterly, becoming moderate south-westerly towards midday. Temperatures are expected to be 22° to 29° with the UV index classified as high. Tomorrow will be mostly cloudy with a 60% chance of thunderstorms, with southerly winds and strong guts. Temperatures will be 20°/24°. Sunday will be cloudy with a 60% chance of rain and temperatures of at 18°/22°

 
  RICHARDS BAY: 
  Partly cloudy becoming cloudy in the afternoon with widespread showers 
  and thundershowers. The wind will be 
  Moderate to fresh north-easterly, becoming moderate south-westerly 
  in the afternoon. Expect temperatures of 23
  °
   to a high of 40°
  . Tomorrow will be mostly cloudy with afternoon showers or thundershowers. Temperatures are expected at 20
  ° to 28
  °. Sunday will see some relief with temperatures at 18
  ° to 22
  °. It will be mostly cloudy with some rain during the day and heavy thunderstorms predicted for Sunday evening.
 
 
  
 
 
  PIETERMARITZBURG: 
  Partly cloudy becoming cloudy in the afternoon with widespread 
  showers and thundershowers. Temperatures will range from 20
  °
   to 38°
  . Tomorrow expect temperatures of 16
  ° to 23
  ° with a 60% chance of thundershowers during the day and heavy rain overnight. Sunday will be cloudy with temperatures of 12
  ° to 19
  ° and rain throughout the day.
 
 
  
 

 The Independent on Saturday