Durban - KwaZulu-Natal farmers and residents have vowed to resist a global petroleum firm’s plans to explore for oil and gas on prime farm land because of fracking’s potential to harm the country’s water supply.
Emotions ran high at a public meeting hosted by Rhino Oil and Gas SA, the subsidiary of US-based Rhino Resources. About 80 farmers and other locals attended it in Escourt on Monday.

The meeting was held to give local stakeholders the opportunity to raise their concerns about environmental issues related to the proposed exploration for oil and gas in the region.
Rhino Oil and Gas chief operating officer Philip Steyn gave a presentation, saying that the meeting was the first step in a three-year scoping and environmental impact assessment process. Steyn and SLR environmental consultancy representative, Matthew Hemming, were accompanied by private security guards.
“South Africa imports large quantities of petroleum at great cost. Discovering local sources of oil and gas would be extremely beneficial to the economy,” Steyn said.

Community members demanded to see the company’s BBEEE certificate and grilled representatives on the potential environmental hazards of fracking, but Steyn and Hemming would not be drawn into a discussion and said the meeting was only about “exploration” - flying a surveillance aircraft 80m to 300m over the area to determine the geology below the surface.
Steyn said there would be “no fracking or drilling” at this stage.
However, farmers said they did not want the company to even begin the first phase because evidence in other parts of the world showed that fracking could contaminate water sources such as streams and boreholes. “The next great wars are going to be fought over water. One thing you haven’t done is explain what happens with fracking. They take millions of litres of water from dams and rivers and put chemicals in and it gets combined and put down a hole, then makes an explosion and the gas comes out,” Escort farmer Roy Caldecott said.

“What happens with the 4% of methane gas that comes out of the ground? And you must explain to us about the 20% to 40% of contaminated water that cannot be recycled that goes to the surface, while the rest goes down to the borehole which you cannot use any more,” Caldecott said. 
Another resident said the company’s plans to eventually sell the rights to extract oil or gas if found would “obliterate” families and communities.
Hemming said the result of mining for gas “could be something in between obliteration and a healthy oil and gas economy. 

“There are places in the world where oil and gas exploration is done safely, and places where it is not,” he said. “Fracking is not the only technique - it is one that works in a particular geological location. Other types could be conventional where you drill a hole and pull it out.”
Escourt farmer Stephanie Bunn said: “We are telling you right at the beginning of your process, don’t even start.” 
Wiseman Ngobese, a representative of Amahlubi King Muziwenkosi Langalibalele II, said the company needed to attend a meeting to present their plans to the king so that he could raise his questions and concerns.

Winterton resident Betsy Meyer said the meeting was not representative of the community as rural people who had no access to social media or newspapers were not even aware it was taking place.
The Mercury