Durban - Patients at Northdale Hospital in Pietermaritzburg are allegedly spending as many as three days sitting on hospital benches waiting for care because of overcrowding and a shortage of beds.
Community activist Jermaine Joseph raised the problem recently, and he and other community members met with the Northdale management last week. 

“My son slept on the bench for three days with a drip in his arm. Some patients are sleeping on the benches for up to eight days.
“We are hearing (from patients) that the hospital is overcrowded, and the nurses have a poor attitude. Nurses are overworked, so of course under those conditions they might have a poor attitude.
“We want changes. The more serious cases should be treated at Grey's Hospital (which is a referral hospital) to ease overcrowding at Northdale. We will lay criminal charges against Grey's management if they refuse to take the patients,” he said. 

Zimasile Giyama, the Harry Gwala regional secretary of the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), said patients were suffering. 
“The problem is the shortage of beds. Patients get to that hospital and find they cannot be admitted and they cannot go home, so they have to sleep on the benches.”
The challenges at Northdale came to light as problems are brewing at Osindisweni Hospital in Verulam, where Nehawu members protested recently, calling for the removal of the workshop manager.

The Mercury understands that the union has also pushed for the removal of the hospital manager, the chief financial officer and the human resources manager. 
Giyama said the issues at Osin- disweni were part of the crises that were plaguing the department across the province. 
Responding to questions regarding the problems at Northdale, health spokesperson Ncumisa Mafunda said: “Northdale Hospital is an old facility that was built before a significant increase in its catchment population.”

She added that demand for healthcare services tended to increase during the December holiday period due to a higher rate of incidents related to trauma and injuries.
“The above-mentioned factors notwithstanding, the management of uMgungundlovu health district is finalising plans to move medical patients to a neighbouring step-down facility.” 
 She said the facility, which currently caters for the needs of patients with non-emergency and non life-threatening ailments, would be equipped with the requisite medical personnel, supplies, equipment and infrastructure.

 “Discussions are taking place between management of Northdale Hospital and the district office to ensure that everything is in place before patients are moved. Lastly, there are plans to expand Northdale Hospital once budgets become available,” she said. 
The department did not respond to a request for comment on the issues at Osindisweni Hospital.
The Mercury