Durban - The new board of Mhlathuze Water has set an ambitious target to expand production and delivery services to all water scarce areas across the province.
“We can’t just be restricted to the north of uThukela. We need to expand our services across this province which has a population second only to Gauteng,” said recently appointed chairperson Thabi Shange yesterday.

The utility’s website states that Mhlathuze Water’s area of supply covers 37000km, stretching from the uThukela River in the south to the Mozambique and Swaziland borders.
“We know there is Umgeni Water but I do not think that will be an issue (with plans to expand services). There are many dry areas in this province, such as uMkhanyakude, those are the areas we need to get into,” she said.
Shange is part of the 11-member board that was recently unveiled by Water and Sanitation Minister Gugile Nkwinti and had its first official meeting on Wednesday.

Mhlathuze has been without a permanent board since the expiry of the previous board’s term of office in 2016. 
In its absence, this thrust current interim chief executive Mthokozisi Duze into the dual roles of chief executive and accounting authority.
Nkwinti expressed confidence in the new board, saying it would bring stability and certainty. 

Shange said in its first briefing yesterday, it had been introduced to the executive team and was brought up to date on the overview of the organisation. 
“This authority has been without a board for quite some time, it is important to get synergies between the board and the chief executive especially on matters of oversight,” she said. 
“But as part of our mandate, the provision of water is the key function, the provision of both potable and even grey water for farming, that is our mandate as the board.” 

She also spoke on the importance of having the board function optimally. She said the board would also carefully manage its own internal dynamics to avoid any dysfunction and political infighting that has collapsed many other boards. 
The Mercury