Durban - Despite warnings from police, there are still those who continue to drink and drive during this festive season.  Metro police nabbed about 85 drunk drivers across the city at the weekend.
Metro Police spokesperson, Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad, said the statistics of all people arrested for drunk driving could be much higher if the arrests made by RTI and the SAPS are taken into consideration.

He expressed unhappiness over the many cases of drunk driving, saying it was clear this trend was on the increase despite the many warnings and enforcement operations.

“To put it into perspective, in November we arrested 145 people for drunk driving, but in the first two weeks of December we have already arrested over 180 people, there is absolutely no compliance,” Sewpersad said.

He said there seemed to be a flagrant disregard for the law from those hell-bent on breaking the by-laws.

“We also have a huge problem of people drinking in public and they turn around and say they are being harassed when there is clear signage in those places. We cannot be apologetic about doing our jobs”.

Sewpersad said the Metro Police officers will continue to crackdown on all transgressions including conducting roadblocks to nab those who have outstanding warrants of arrest due to unpaid fines.

  Meanwhile, o
  ne murder, 106 rescue operations and 1.8 million tons of waste collected.
 
 
This is what authorities had to contend with over the long weekend at Durban’s beaches which hosted close to 800 000 visitors .

City spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said at central beaches approximately 410210 patrons were recorded on the beach with the southern region hosting 298028 patrons. The northern region was home to 63000 beach goers.

Apart from the murder at Casuarina Beach near oThongathi, there were no other major incidents reported.

Regarding the murder, Mayisela said a patron at the beach was shot after an alleged altercation. 

“The suspect was arrested and the matter handed over to the SAPS. There was also a case of a hit and run incident at the same beach.”

Police said a 31-year-old suspect, who has been charged with killing a 35-year-old man would appear at the Verulam Magistrate’s Court this morning .

The city also recorded 1725 children who were separated from their parents/guardians across all Durban beaches. 

“They were all reunited, thanks to the 39947 armbands issued to all children at the beaches. Officials have urged parents and guardians to be extra cautious when coming to the beach with children, as they can easily get lost in the large crowd,” Mayisela said.

The Mercury