Durban - Lawyers representing hundreds of listeriosis victims in a class action lawsuit against Tiger Brands say they will be gunning for constitutional damages against the company.
Human rights lawyer Richard Spoor said this yesterday after the high court gave the class action the go-ahead.

Spoor said the claimants’ summons would be served on Tiger Brands in January. 
“Once we have issued the summons, the company will have to plead to that. We’ve got a draft, but we are holding it back until the beginning of the year because we want to check it carefully.”
Regarding compensation, Spoor said normally compensation for victims, especially old people and young children, was minimal as there was no loss of income to consider - it ended up covering medical and funeral costs.

He said constitutional damages, as was the case with Life Esidimeni victims, could be pursued where it is felt the constitutional rights of the victims were violated by the actions of the other party.
Although about 150 victims are part of the lawsuit, more are expected to come forward, especially after the start of a notice process - a requirement in law - to inform victims about the class action.
Tiger Brands has committed to paying R1million towards the campaign, with Spoor pointing out that Marler Clark attorneys in the US has committed to making available a similar amount.

“We have committed to acting with honesty and integrity throughout this process and are therefore working closely with the attorneys for the claimants to expedite this matter,” read a statement from Mary Jane Morifi, the chief corporate affairs officer at Tiger Brands. 
Spoor said he believed it was in the interest of Tiger Brands to co-operate. “Instead of dealing with many cases all over the country, something which could cost them a lot of money, they can just focus on one case,” he said.
The Department of Health will also send letters to the victims, with Spoor saying there were about 1000.

Lawyers from both sides have also been mulling the idea of establishing a panel of doctors to examine the victims and their records.
This would also save time because victims would not need to be examined twice - by their own doctors and the company’s.
Spoor believes the claimants have a strong case. “In South Africa we don’t have a history of holding companies to account. We want to raise public awareness because without accountability there is no justice.”

In a statement Tiger Brands said: “No liability has been established against the company for the listeriosis outbreak. However, should liability be determined, the company will respond appropriately to any legitimate claims.”
Amelia Govender, one victim of the listeriosis outbreak, said a simple warning could have saved her baby’s life.
Her baby was born prematurely - a month earlier than expected - because she had been infected.

“In such situations you tend to blame yourself. You ask yourself if you could have done anything differently. I’d had a good pregnancy. It was shocking that such a thing could have happened.” 
She said her baby spent several days in the hospital’s intensive care unit before the heart-wrenching decision was made to switch off life support.
Govender said her baby had no brain activity and she could not bear to see all the tubes keeping her alive.

She said the death had numbed and confused her. Only later did tests show that she and her baby had been infected with the bacteria.
She has battled since the death of her baby in November last year. “To me it still feels like yesterday. I have come to realise this does not have an expiry date. It’s not easy. “
Govender said she had sought professional help. “I can’t be around children. It is a struggle. I’ve had to be strong, for my fiancé and my family,” she said. 

She said of the pending lawsuit against Tiger Brands that she kept in contact with the team leading the lawsuit and would tell her story if asked.
The Mercury