Durban - Almost seven months after well-known University of Zululand academic Professor Gregory Kamwendo, 53, was gunned down, the police last week made a significant breakthrough in the case when two men were arrested.
Oscar Mbhekiseni Mthiyane, 50, and Selby Zwelicude Nkuma, 49, appeared in the Empangeni Magistrate’s Court on Tuesday facing charges of premeditated murder. 

Kamwendo, who was the dean of the arts faculty at Unizulu, was killed as he was arriving at his residence at an upmarket complex in Empangeni on May 22. 
The university has distanced itself from media reports that the professor was killed after he uncovered a fraudulent PhD syndicate at the institution. 
It said the reports had “distorted vital facts of the matter”.

The university said its management had not undertaken any investigation into the awarding of fake PhD qualifications. However, it said that during the endorsement period for students who qualified for graduation in 2017 and 2018, the higher degrees committee and senate discovered that some of the presented dissertations did not comply with policy imperatives. 
“Management (including Kamwendo) diligently applied the University of Zululand’s policies that govern and regulate the quality assurance and integrity of its post-graduate administration, supervision and the eventual graduation of these candidates. 
“In this process it became clear in certain instances that some of the presented dissertations/theses had procedural and quality shortcomings.”

It said that due to the findings, disciplinary processes had been instituted against the perpetrators, who included supervisors and academic staff.
The university said it had become the norm that when perpetrators “who have connections in higher places” are disciplined, they shift the blame to management who are then accused of maladministration and the victimisation of staff.
“It is the view of the university that Professor Kamwendo could have been a victim of this continuation of undermining the leadership through mafia tendencies, hence his tragic assassination.”

The university urged that the case be allowed to follow all due processes so that justice could be done.
“We have noted with shock that speculation and pre-emptive arguments are widespread on the motive of the murder. Yet the law enforcement investigators of the case have not made any public statement on the motive of the killing. The university therefore distances itself from such speculation.”
The Mercury