Durban - The daring helicopter rescue of a teen who slipped and fell down Karkloof Falls on Wednesday has been described by witnesses as astounding.
The youngster, from Alverstone outside Hillcrest, was messing around with friends at a birthday braai when he slipped and fell 50m down one of the falls.

A resident who was nearby jumped in and helped the youngster to some nearby rocks.
Mountain rescue and paramedics were soon on the scene, along with the Netcare 911 specialised helicopter.
For pilot Botha “Boats” Olivier, it looked as though the rescue with baskets and rope could take too long. “At first we landed on the grass, but the patient had head injuries and a broken ankle. He had been down there a while and I was also worried that daylight would fade if it took too long.

 
 
  Brave pilot Botha “Boats” Olivier
 


“I looked down and saw a fairly flat piece of rock. Our other paramedic, Julian Brown went down and checked the space and if it was as flat as it looked from above.
“It was about 25m down and he said the space would be okay to land,” said Olivier.

He checked the space again to make sure there was maximum room for the helicopter’s skids, as well as enough clearance space for the rotor blades.
“It was viable. The area was clear enough, I had enough power, I had enough light and I had someone to guide me. It was calculated and controlled. If I couldn’t have landed the skids properly, I wouldn’t have tried it. As soon as I started going down, it was difficult to see and Julian directed me to the flattest part of the rock,” he said.
Once the aircraft was in position, the paramedics loaded the injured teen into the helicopter and he was flown to a Durban hospital.

With the festive season getting under way yesterday, Olivier, whose shifts rotate between Netcare’s bases in Johannesburg, Durban and Cape Town, said their busiest time of year was just starting - and that he was ready for it.
Having been flying since 1975, Olivier said, “Being at the controls rejuvenates my soul and keeps me young. Flying is my passion and I’m blessed that my passion is my work.
“The most rewarding part of my work is to get somebody home and on their way to recovery. Like when I saw that young boy’s mother waiting at the hospital.

“It’s the human contact that makes you go on to do the next one. I’m very lucky to be able to help someone in their moments of distress.
“I only worked the Rand last year, but we are now rotating around bases from Joburg, Durban and Cape Town and we have already had more call-outs this December than the whole of December last year.
“With every incident, we have to take into account condition of the patient, wind, space and possible obstruction before we can land.”

The teen’s family could not be contacted for comment on his condition, but it was reported that he had suffered from a bleed on the brain, an orbital break (eye bone) and a broken ankle. Additional information Village Talk (Howick).
Independent On Saturday