Durban - Sixteen KwaZulu-Natal mortuary workers who were arrested yesterday, are due to appear in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate's Court today. 
The group, aged between 37 and 62,  was arrested after they were found to be in contempt of a court order. 

Three weeks ago, staff from the Fort Napier Medico-Legal Mortuary in Pietermaritzburg embarked on a go slow. 
KZN Department of Health spokesperson, Ncumisa Mafunda, said the court order was secured against the striking staff members last week. 
She said the arrests come after numerous failed attempts to persuade the workers to abandon the go slow which they embarked upon in November. 

"Workers were issued with an ultimatum and then that was followed by an interim order granted by the court, interdicting the workers from participating in an illegal strike. When the workers failed to abide by that judgement, we filed another application against the workers for being in contempt of court,"  she said. 
Mafunda explained that on December 4, the court pronounced on the two applications, firstly, granting the final order to interdict workers from embarking on a wild cat strike and secondly, granting another court order against the workers  for being in contempt of court.
Workers were afforded an opportunity to go back to work but this was ignored. 

Mafunda said with the workers failing to return to work and work at optimum level, the Department was left with no option but to return to court to ask the judge to lift the suspension of the order so that laws of dealing with wild cat strikes could be implemented against employees.
She added that the department is also doing its best to assist the bereaved families by keeping them informed and providing transport where necessary. “We want to apologise to the grieving families affected by the go-slow, and will continue to strive to improve the situation,” Mafunda said.
In the meantime, members of the public who wish to enquire about the progress of the autopsies of their loved ones are urged to contact the KZN Health Provincial Operations Centre on Toll Free: 0800 005 133. They will be requested to leave their details, and will be contacted and given an update.

The Mercury