Durban - The history curriculum is set to undergo a major overhaul as the Department of Basic Education seeks to make the subject more Afrocentric and relevant to South African pupils.
The department announced yesterday that Minister Angie Motshekga had approved the reappointment of the History Ministerial Task Team to overhaul the history curriculum.

No time frames have been announced, but the department said there would be an extensive consultation process. 
The announcement comes after the recommendation of the ministerial task team report released last year that there should be a complete overhaul of the History Curriculum and Assessment Statement from Grades4 to 12. 
Education experts said rewriting history was essential to educate pupils about the country’s past. They said it was also important to extend the subject to the rich history of the continent.

Motshekga said the task team would comprise the same panel initially assembled to conduct the feasibility of making history a compulsory subject throughout the schooling system.
“This is to ensure that the new history curriculum is representative and covers multiple perspectives.
“Inside and outside the education sector, there has been a lot of excitement and anticipation regarding the overhaul of our history education in schools, which has been characterised by many as perpetuating a colonial or Western perspective,” she said.

Motshekga said she had absolute faith in the team of experts “who are going to be forging the way forward in terms of how we teach our young people about the past”. 
“I believe that a comprehensive, well-rounded and accurate teaching of history will help our pupils understand themselves better and will help the country move forward together,” Motshekga said.
The department said the reappointment of the team was the next step in the decolonisation of the country’s education system.

Professor Noor Nieftagodien, the head of the History Workshop at Wits University’s School of Social Sciences and South African Research Chair in Local Histories, Present Realities, said the overhaul presented an opportunity to make history balanced.
“But this is also an opportunity to make history more exciting to pupils. The history of the African continent is rich,” he said. 
Nieftagodien said, in order to ensure balance, professors, teachers, the unions and other stakeholders should discuss what should be part of the curriculum. 

“What should be part of the new curriculum cannot be one thing. Pupils are already studying the Struggle against apartheid and, as important as that is, it cannot be the only thing that is learned, and not all that is currently learned should be thrown out,” he said.
He cautioned against focusing on the perspective of the history of the “victors”.
“If you look at the current history of the Struggle, it’s often said that it is only told from the perspective of the ANC, and the PAC and the Black Consciousness Movement’s roles are absent.” 

Professor Labby Ramrathan, the director of the School of Education Studies at UKZN, said it was important to make sure that the history of the country was balanced. 
“I agree with having history as subject in schools, but not as a compulsory subject all the way to Grade 12. Teaching the subject until Grade9 is good, but beyond that I’m not sure what more history pupils could learn.”
He said that, as a developing nation, it was important to focus on subjects that could help the nation develop, and not to fill the curriculum with ­subjects that had limited career prospects.

He said such insistence created the perception that history was there to serve political purposes rather than ­academic needs. 
The Mercury