Durban - It will be a bleak Christmas for impoverished children and senior citizens in Nkandla as there is uncertainty over whether the parties former president Jacob Zuma has hosted for them annually will go ahead this year.
With nine days until Christmas, the Jacob G Zuma RDP Education Trust, which organises the events, has yet to confirm that they will happen.

Halala Sibiya, senior officer at the trust, said: “We are going to meet on Sunday (today), and that is where we are going to plan and finalise everything about the events There’s nothing finalised yet.” She would not comment further.
When he was president, Zuma’s Christmas parties were attended by Cabinet ministers and prominent business people. However, last year it was evident that his popularity among the who’s who was fading.
Only his die-hard supporters, Bathabile Dlamini, minister of Women in the Presidency, and former minister of State Security, Bongani Bongo were in attendance.

A source close to Zuma said he was unsure if the parties would go ahead.
“We haven’t heard anything as yet. But I hope we are going to hear something in the coming days because Christmas is around the corner. If the events do not happen (it) will be a huge blow for the community, which languishes in poverty,” said the source.
Resident Khonzephi Hadebe, whose son has received school uniforms from the trust, said: “I will be disappointed if these events don’t take place because my son has been receiving school uniforms since he was in Grade R, in 2015.

“I’m praying that everything comes together.” In July, the JG Zuma marathon, run between Seven Oaks, outside Greytown, to Umshwathi, outside ­Pietermaritzburg, was cancelled at the 11th hour. Organisers said the race, which was launched in 2015, was derailed because they had failed to secure sponsors.
Like this race, the Christmas events Zuma hosted in Nkandla were sponsored by business people and organisations.
A member of the ANC, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said no one wanted to be associated with Zuma because there was “a new sheriff in town”, President Cyril Ramaphosa.

“So even funding his parties is problematic because you (a funder) would be seen as someone who still has ties with the old man.
And this might bring trouble to your door because the supporters of Ramaphosa are fighting to make sure that he (president) is not undermined,” said the party member, who added the Nkandla parties had not been finalised due to a lack of funds.
Zuma’s financial troubles deepened this week when the North Gauteng High Court found he had “illegally used” taxpayers’ money on his defence in corruption and fraud cases, and ordered him to repay millions of rand to the state.

While there is uncertainty over whether the Christmas parties will be held, a chess tournament sponsored by foundation will go ahead as planned on Thursday at Sibusisiwe Hall in Mandeni, northern KwaZulu-Natal.
Sandile Xulu of the foundation, with former SAA as chairperson Dudu Myeni, said: “We are ready. Everything is sorted.”
Inkosi Simphiwe Zuma of the Nxamalala clan in Mpendle, outside Pietermaritzburg, also confirmed that the annual celebration of the AmaNxamalala Trust, a Zuma family gathering held to celebrate the founder of the Nxamalala, Inkosi Matomela, would take place on Tuesday.

Sunday Tribune