Durban - Nomvula Mokonyane, Minister of Environmental Affairs has urged all South Africans and holiday makers to enjoy the coastline responsibly during the festive season.
She said the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) is continuing with a coastal awareness programme to remind “us all that we are custodians of our valuable coastal resources.” 

“It is our duty to ensure that we do not litter, do not drive on the beach and accord everyone their right to access public coastal property,” said Mokonyane.
The awareness campaign will include coastal and marine pollution, public access to the beach and illegal driving on the beach, among others.
 “Members of the public are encouraged to report illegal beach driving and private beaches (exclusive use) including any other illegal activities in the coastal areas,” she said.

Mokonyane explained that one of the issues the department addresses every year during the festive season is the illegal limitations on public access to the beach.
“It is unlawful in terms of the The National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act, (ICM Act) to implement measures which prevent public access to the beach, not permitted under that Act,” she said.
 She said it is only under certain strict circumstances that the public’s access to the beach may be limited.

 Mokonyane said the  ICM Act supports tourism, recreational fishing and fair access to amenities, she said.
 “In addition, under the Act, no one may charge a fee (directly or indirectly) in order to access coastal public property, without the permission of the Minister responsible for environmental affairs,” said Mokonyane.
 The minister said the use of vehicles in the coastal area is generally prohibited, however permits are granted only in exceptional circumstances, for people with physical disabilities for example.

 “The reason for this ban on Off-Road Vehicles (ORVs) in the coastal area is to safeguard and protect our coastal environment. 
“The ban of the ORVs in the coastal area is also aimed at balancing and managing conflict that may arise between ORV users and the general public that access the coast by foot. In the past vehicles destabilised and destroyed vegetated dunes,” she said.
 Mokonyane further explained that the department is also dealing with pollution along the coast from marine litter, including plastic litter, which has become a matter of increasing global and national concern as a source of marine pollution.

“Plastics are the cause of increasing ocean pollution, which in turn affects marine life, and consequently humans as well,” she said.
karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury