Durban - Safety measures at the popular Karkloof Falls will be prioritised following another incident involving a 13-year-old boy who slipped and fell 9m on Saturday.
The latest incident has led to the uMngeni Municipality sending a delegation to the land owner, Sappi, to discuss safety issues. 

This comes days after a 14-year-old Durban boy fell several metres off Karkloof Falls and suffered serious injuries, landing him in intensive care on Wednesday.
uMngeni Municipality spokesperson, Thando Mgaga, said the delegation will engage Sappi regarding safety measures at Karkloof Falls "and to ascertain what happened and the precautionary measures thereafter”.
Netcare 911 KZN spokesperson Shawn Herbst said paramedics responded to the fall at Karkloof Falls on Saturday. 

“Reports from the scene indicated that a 13-year-old male had fallen approximately nine metres off the falls,” Herbst said.
The boy had sustained moderate injuries and was in severe pain.
“He was treated on scene by an advanced life support paramedic and the Pietermaritzburg SAPS Search and Rescue Unit set up a rope rescue system with a specialised stretcher to carry the boy to safety,” said Herbst.

The patient was stabilised and then transported to hospital for further treatment.
Mgaga said every incident or accident that leads to injuries or fatalities in any area within the jurisdiction of uMngeni Municipality is a serious concern to the council. 
“It is our wish that every community member or tourist is safe at all times while exploring what our municipality has to offer,” said Mgaga.

In October, a Howick couple, André and Mar-Louise Pretorius, slipped off a cliff at the falls and are still recovering from their injuries.
Herbst said in summer there is more algae production on the rocks due to the excessive heat.
“Because of the slope of the rocks and the smoother surface, if someone slips, they’ll fall all the way down."

Elsewhere, an 11-year-old girl survived a near-drowning in Payne Street, Pinetown, on Sunday.
Rescue Care spokesperson Garrith Jamieson said paramedics arrived on scene at a block of flats to find the family and residents in a “frantic” state.
He said members of the public pulled the young girl from the swimming pool and waited for paramedics. 

“Fortunately the girl survived the incident and was stabilised on the scene before being transported to a nearby hospital for further care,” said Jamieson.
The Mercury