Durban - Speak about your problems because “there is always someone out there to listen”.
This is the advice Nirvana Singh, chairperson of the Phoenix Youth Desk, gave young people as many eagerly await the results of their matric exams.

In a message to matriculants, she said: “Waiting for your results is rather daunting indeed. However, no matter what the outcome may be, don’t give up. Failure is a stepping stone to success. Don’t let the outcome of your results get you down or depressed. You need to stand tall and own it. Always remember that there are supplementary examinations and repeating a year is not a crime and the failure is not a big deal.” 
Singh, a 22-year-old law student who is keen on family and criminal law, was elected chairperson of the youth forum in 2016.
She said the youth had a voice and need to use it to express their emotions and feelings. 

“Bottling up their emotions will only destroy them and the people who love them. My advice is to speak about their problems and issues to someone as there is always someone out there to listen to them,” she said.
The purpose of the youth desk, which hads more than 80 members, was to help youth who were turmoil as well as to prevent them following the wrong path, she said.
“We tackle anger management, substance abuse, bullying at schools, peer pressure, domestic violence and the list goes on,” Singh said.

She explained that her studies had shown her that by just being a part of one crime could turn a person’s world upside down.
The Youth Desk was involved in the 16 Days of Activismprogramme.
“We assisted in the motorcade, the placard demonstration and addressed the community,” said Singh.

The law student is also the vice-chairperson of the SAPS Outer North Youth Desk Forum which services the Tongaat, Verulam, Durban North, and uMhlanga communities. 
“We assist the police in drug raids and have workshops for the youth to educate them on the consequences of substance abuse,”said Singh. 
She said she took “her hat off” to the SAPS and security companies working in the area.

Youth can get involved in the youth desk by contacting Sergeant Merl Govender at 0747853911, Singh added. 
The Mercury