Durban - An eight-year battle for control of the Mbuyazi traditional community in KwaMbonambi near Richards Bay is set to go to trial following a recent Constitutional Court judgment.
The court found that the removal of the clan’s late inkosi could still be subject to review, almost seven years after his death.

It had been approached by Sithembile Valencia Mkhize, the wife of the late Inkosi Zwelibhekile Mbuyazi of the Mbuyazi clan who wants to determine whether the removal of her husband was unlawful. 
The matter has been the subject of several applications and counter- applications in the high court and the Supreme Court of Appeal.
The respondents are the KZN premier, the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and the late inkosi’s half brother, Mkhanyiseni Mbuyazi. 

Both Zwelibhekile and Mkhanyiseni were children of Inkosi Mtholeni Mthiyane, who died in June 2005. 
Zwelibhekile had taken over in September 2006. 
“However there was a dispute as to who the rightful inkosi was and an expert in Zulu law, Professor Langalibalele Mathenjwa, was appointed to investigate and resolve the dispute,” the court said in its judgment.

Mathenjwa found that Mkhanyiseni should have assumed control.
After Mkhanyiseni was appointed by the premier, Zwelibhekile launched an urgent application in the high court in March 2010 seeking a review. 
The court granted interim relief, suspending the appointment of Mkhanyiseni.

But the premier appealed against this ruling and the appeal court granted the premier the right to oppose.
When the review application was heard, the judge decided that the matter should go to trial. 
However, in July 2012, Zwelibhekile died and after his death, Mkhanyiseni brought an application which sought to discharge the orders made in his brother’s favour. 

He argued that for Zwelibhekile to be recognised as inkosi, he had to be alive as the rights were personal to him.
In November that year, Mkhize, filed a notice opposing the application and four days later, she brought a counter-application seeking to be substituted as the applicant in applications brought by her late husband.
Her application was dismissed in July 2013, but she then approached the Supreme Court of Appeal.

The SCA referred the matter to trial.
In January 2015, the premier approached the Constitutional Court for leave to appeal against the SCA order. 
In the Constitutional Court, Mkhize argued that the matter needed to go to trial because her son Phathokuhle’s claim to become inkosi depended on a ruling being made regarding his father’s removal.

The court found that Mkhize had standing both to bring and to be substituted in the review application in place of her husband because she was executrix of the deceased inkosi’s estate and guardian of her son.
The Mercury