The family of the 22-year-old Pietermaritzburg man who drowned on Tuesday morning have started funeral arrangements after his body was found near the pier where he drowned.
It is believed a private beach security company found Diren Chetty’s body on Saturday morning.

Chetty’s uncle Preggy Nair said the family were called by authorities to notify them. They have since started to arrange his funeral to take place on Christmas Day.
“We are grateful to those who never gave up searching for Diren. By finding the body, we are now able to find closure and say a proper goodbye to him,” Nair said.
He was not sure why Chetty’s body was not found sooner as it is believed his body was “stuck” under the pier.

“He dived in on the right side of the pier and his body was found on the left,” Nair said.
Chetty and his friends were at a party at his friend’s flat in Berea over the long weekend.
He and two other friends decided to go to the beach to watch the sunrise at around 4.30am. “He went with his two friends - a girl and a boy.

"They decided to dip their feet in the water but the girl could not swim; only Diren decided to go further into the ocean. His friends said he dived in but never came up,” Nair said.
According to Nair, the boy immediately ran to the nearby police station to call for help, but it was too early and lifeguards were not on duty.
“I don’t believe they were too helpful because no one called search and rescue either. It was only around 9am that lifeguards went out on speedboats to look for his body, but they were unsuccessful,” Nair said.

The family were left “unsettled” in the days after the drowning, he said, but had now started the healing process after Chetty’s body was found.
In a separate incident, the National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI) responded to reports of a boat that capsized in the surf while launching into the sea at St Lucia on Saturday morning.
NSRI St Lucia station commander Jan Hofman said three males were found safe ashore and not injured, as they had been assisted by local fishermen.

Mercury