Durban - The head of the city’s investigations and integrity unit, Mbuso Ngcobo, had his home invaded in an apparent robbery during the early hours of Sunday morning.
The incident has raised concerns about the breach of security at the official’s home.

He is said to have recently received death threats.
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala confirmed the incident and said a security guard at the Hillcrest home had been accosted by three people about 2.30am.
“At gun and knife-point they forced him to lie down, handcuffed him and they then took the TV.

“The victim was rescued by his colleague.
“A case of robbery was opened at Hillcrest police station for investigation,” Gwala said. 
Ngcobo and his family were asleep in the main house during the incident.

The Mercury understands that one of the guards shot at the invaders, but it was not clear whether they returned fire.
Some, however, believe this was no ordinary robbery, pointing out that Ngcobo’s house has tight security.
“It does not make sense for his house to be the only one targeted in the area. Why would robbers leave all the other houses and target the one that even has guards stationed there?” said a source.

Ngcobo’s unit investigates misconduct, corruption and fraud at the municipality. Some of the investigations have led to the opening of criminal cases by the municipality, suspensions and the dismissal of officials.
Due to the nature of his job, Ngcobo has round-the-clock security deployed in terms of security threat assessments.
Contacted, Ngcobo chose not to comment on the matter. 

Municipal spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the matter had been referred to the police and so all queries should be directed to them.
An official from the municipality said Ngcobo had been subjected to numerous threats which had “intensified recently, mainly because of the investigations currently being conducted at the municipality by agencies such as the Hawks.”
The official also revealed that the incident was the second at Ngcobo’s home in about a year. 

The first time the thieves stole computers.
The Mercury