Durban - eThekwini residents who have had their electricity disconnected or face such a prospect because of non-payment have been thrown a lifeline by the city.
At the final executive committee meeting for the year, a decision was taken that the defaulting customers can have their supply reinstated without making upfront payments.

This would be subject to the affected residents signing an acknowledgement of debt, entering into a payment arrangement with the municipality and changing to pre-paid meters.
However, this does not mean that the city is completely doing away with costs related to re-connection or that debt owed will be written off but that the costs may be paid up to a maximum of 36 months.
The duration of the payment term will be determined by the outcome of each affected person’s affordability assessment.

The recommendations came before the executive committee on Tuesday after being made at the Human Settlements and Infrastructure Committee.
“The customer will continue to have access to electricity service as long as the terms and conditions of the acknowledgement of debt and credit authority are honoured,” reads the report.
Mondli Mthembu, chairperson of the Human Settlements and Infrastructure Committee, said this would also help the municipality to cut down on illegal electricity connections.

The city’s budget for 2018/2019 estimates that eThekwini is losing about R150million a year due to the theft of electricity.
“Electricity is a basic need and the more we disconnect people, the more we are going to see people making illegal connections. It is best to have people come forward and make arrangements. 
“This will ensure that the revenue is not lost because we are also facing the challenge of declining revenue,” Mthembu told The Mercury.

He said the new arrangement would also benefit indebted customers who want to switch to prepaid provided they own those properties. They may also reach an agreement on payment terms for outstanding debts.
“They will not be disconnected after they have filled in an affordability form and an affordability assessment has been done, provided that they honour their payments. 
“Their meters will be removed and be replaced with prepaid meters to ensure they can monitor their usage.” 

Krish Kumar, deputy city manager responsible for finance, said the move came after the recognition that residents were facing tough economic times.
The Mercury