Durban - Could the long-awaited soccer academy in Durban’s Kings Park precinct finally take shape?
After several years’ delay, Carlos Catalina of Hoy Park Management said yesterday that they had been given the green light by the city to officially take occupation of the 14-hectare precinct from today.

The multimillion-rand project, initially announced in 2012 and which was to include a partnership with English Premier League team Liverpool, ground to a halt after objections by the Stables Market management and stallholders, who would have had to close shop.
The academy precinct would include new training fields, a revamped velodrome, accommodation for learners, a hotel, a high-performance training centre, and other related services.
However, yesterday the Stables Market legal team disputed the legality of the lease and eThekwini Municipality could not comment on the matter because it said it was still before court.

“We’ve been waiting to occupy the land for years now and we officially got the lease this week,” said Catalina.
“We are ready to go because we have been running an academy from one field only, and we cannot take more than the 144 boys that we are presently training. With the extra land, we can take on more future stars.
“With all the facilities located in one precinct, imagine the sports tourism it would attract. An international person can fly straight in, stay in the hotel and go to the facilities on site, and all next to the stadium,” said Catalina.

The project is a venture between management company Hoy Park and the SA Football Association, to train and develop soccer players.
Catalina said they would begin development next month, once the construction industry resumed work after the festive season, and first on their list was creating three synthetic training fields and to revamp the velodrome. “Durbanites can expect a lot of activity. We want to begin immediately,” he said.
Meanwhile, lawyer Tashya Giyapersad, representing the Stables Market, said the comments made by Catalina were not correct.

“They are unilaterally doing this. We are in negotiations with the municipality and any attempt to move our clients will result in an urgent high court application,” she said.
eThekwini Municipality did not confirm the lease agreement and spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said: “The matter concerning the Stables Lifestyle Market is currently pending in court, therefore the city cannot provide comment at this stage.”
Catalina said they were willing to discuss options with the stallholders.

The Liverpool soccer brand pulled out of the partnership after “clashes” between the partners.