Durban - The uMhlanga spearfishing club stressed the importance of having a dive buddy to its members following the death of Marco van Wyk on Friday.
Marco van Wyk,50, allegedly drowned near Sheffield Beach on Friday. Quentin Power, NSRI Ballito station commander, said they received a call just after 9 pm on Thursday following reports of a spearfisherman missing in the Sheffield Beach area.

The Umhlanga Spearfishing said their member Chris Coates found Marco at the northern end of the 12-14m ledge at Sheffield/Xmas bay point. He was found in a relaxed hunting position. 
The club Facebook page stated that Marco was lying on the bottom where there was not much current.  Marco had a second gun in his hand and the spear had been fired but no fish on it. 
On Thursday, the sea rescue craft Challenger 2 was launched and Kwadakuza Municipal lifeguards and IPSS Medical Rescue responded.

"A diver had seen Marco's marker buoy off-shore of Sheffield Beach and later when he returned, some 2 hours later, the marker buoy appeared to still be in the same place appearing to have not moved," Power explained. 
Power said the diver had found a speargun attached to the marker buoy but there was no sign of Marco. Concerns were raised further when the vehicle of Marco was found to still be in the car park and the alarm was raised.
During the ongoing search, the missing diver was located by a member of the spearfishing club 

Mario van Wyk described his father as an exceptionally good diver. 
The Umhlanga Spearfishing Club Facebook page described Marco van Wyk as the most patient and humblest of people. He was always willing to give advice and help to anyone. 
The club stressed that it was important to have a dive buddy with you at all times.

Jarryd van Reenen said, "We lost a great friend and great competitor today."
Lourens Du Toit said, "This is truly Sad. What a humble passionate spearo. Could not meet a better random diver. Great company.Condolences to his family."
Bronze Beach lifeguards sent their condolences to family and friends and a big thank you to all involved in the recovery. 

Daily News