An NGO working with drug addicts in the city has been identified as the main source of the multiple used needles and drug-contaminated syringes which recently washed up on the city's beaches.

Last month the city launched an investigation into the incident and on Tuesday deputy mayor Fawzia Peer told the executive committee (Exco) that it was found the syringes originated from an NGO called TB HIV Care, which distributes syringes to drug users.

The Mercury has established that the NGO’s programme, which deals with drug users, is operated from its Umbilo offices.

Peer told the committee that the city's legal department would be engaged to check on the legality of the distribution of these syringes.

“When an investigation was done we found that some of the syringes had drugs in them,” said Peer, who added that some bags full of syringes had also been found on the beachfront.

She said it appeared that the syringes were given to vagrants and drug users "willy-nilly" and no proper controls were in place.

“The committee found that this is not controlled well. When a youngster uses a syringe, they just throw them anywhere,” she said.

Peer added that the city had also established that the NGO has a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the provincial and national health departments. The city would be meeting with officials to try to get a better understanding of the MoU, she said.

Peer warned that making the syringes so easily available could inadvertently be giving youngsters a leeway to use drugs.

When contacted on Tuesday, the organisation said the aim of supplying syringes was to reduce and prevent HIV infections and other blood-borne diseases.

TB HIV Care spokesperson Alison Best said as soon as the organisation was alerted to the syringes being found in January it dispatched a team, which worked with eThekwini municipality to clean up.

Best said the organisation encouraged users to dispose of their used needles and syringes in a “safe manner”.

The NGO said it supplies sealed Sharps disposal containers, from which used needles cannot be extracted, to users, who are incentivised to return used syringes.

Best said studies showed that limiting the distribution of needles and syringes increases the risk that they will be disposed of inappropriately.

“Other factors leading to the unsafe disposal of needles and syringes are a lack of appropriate needle disposal points, lack of safe injecting spaces, increased arrests of people who inject drugs, and laws that criminalise the possession of used or unused injecting equipment,” Best said.

Graham du Randt, the director of Compass Waste Medical Services, said medical waste contributes to environmental pollution and there is a risk that it might spread infection to those who come in contact with it.

He said a person accidentally pricked by a used needle should immediately seek medical attention.

Environmental activist Bobby Peek said the city and department of health should work with the NGO to show its methods of managing the waste.

Members of the Exco expressed concern. Speaker Lekgoa Mapena said the needles put those who go to North and South Beach at risk.

“If we don't deal with those matters it will harm those people,” he said.

Mayor Zandile Gumede said the distribution of syringes would need to be stopped until it could be done in a controlled manner.

The Mercury