An animal activist has started a water collection drive for the animals of Cape Town, as the city continues to suffer the worst drought in 100 years.

Fiona Baron started Water for Paws in Cape Town to collect water for animals in shelters, vets and rehabilitation centers across the city. 

Three months in and collection drives are now taking place in KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape and Gauteng.

“Animal lovers are generally sensitive to the needs of animals. But with  this campaign my aim was to also appeal to those who don't have pets to participate in the campaign,” said Baron. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 Durban resident, Rose Karsten, who is driving the KZN collection said; "I’m an animal lover and had been wondering how many people would be thinking of the fur babies in need of water to drink in their various homes and shelters, especially with the limited water rations meted out to residential homes."

 Donations of water bottles can be dropped off at the eight drop-off points in the province. 

 “We are looking for new drop-off points in and around KwaZulu-Natal and Cape Town, if there are any transport companies or trucks returning to Cape Town without loads, their assistance is welcome. Even storage facilities or vacant garages where we can store the water in-between drop-offs would be amazing,” said Karsten. 

Drop off point details are available on the Water For Paws Facebook page. 

Meanwhile, more than 40 runners who will be participating  in the Two Oceans Marathon, next month, have pledged to take their own water with them. 

Protea Tours which drives runners to Cape Town for the marathon every year, said they will also be donating some of the water. 

Company director Nolan Naidoo said the tour bus will leave KZN on March 28 after collecting runners and an expected 300 litres of water. 

“It is safer for athletes to travel in this way, with a designated, rested driver, which will give them enough rest time before and after the marathon. We decided this year to things slightly differently, in that we included the water drive in response to the water crisis in Cape Town.”

While Day Zero has been pushed back to May, the water crisis in Cape Town is still dire. "The water collected will assist the runners, so as not to burden the already depleted water resources in the city. The rest will be distributed to the vulnerable and needy," he said. 
The Mercury