Durban - The UK has warned of a terrorist threat from extremists linked to the Islamic State (Isis) group, following the abduction of a South African-British couple in KZN, earlier this month.

The warning came on the UK government’s website.

It read: “In February 2018, two South African-British dual nationals were kidnapped. There’s an increasing threat of kidnap throughout SA. 

“Kidnaps can be for financial gain or motivated by criminality. British nationals can be perceived as being wealthier than locals and may be at particular risk of kidnap for financial gain.”ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The warning is believed to have been made in reference to an elderly couple’s alleged abduction from northern KwaZulu-Natal.

Hawks spokesperson Captain Lloyd Ramovha on Tuesday confirmed that officers had swooped on two suspects thought to be linked to the disappearance of the 64-year-old and a 73-year-old, who went missing on February 12.

Ramovha said while the couple had dual citizenship, they had lived in South Africa. He said the couples’ identities were not being revealed at present.

Ramovha said police had been hunting the suspects – Sayfydeen Aslam del Vecchio, 38, and Fatima Patel, 27 – on arson charges ever since they allegedly torched a Huletts sugar cane field in the province, last year. He said police finally nabbed them on Friday and they were subsequently linked to the elderly couple’s disappearance.

Del Vecchio and Patel came before the Vryheid Magistrate’s Court on Monday on charges of kidnapping, robbery and arson.

Ramovha said that they were remanded in police custody and due back in court next week, for a formal bail application.

Patel and her brother, Ebrahim, were arrested during the same 2016 Gauteng raids that saw terror-accused twins Brendon-Lee and Tony-Lee Thulsie nabbed.

They were charged with violating the Explosives Act and the Firearms Control Act and released on R5 000 bail each.

Despite this, Ramovha was yesterday adamant that this case was “not necessarily linked to terrorism”.

“She (Patel) was never even charged with terrorism,” he said.

The Mercury