JOHANNESBURG -  On February 15, South Africa ushered in a newly elected president, Cyril Ramaphosa, and a new first family along with him.Until now, members of the first family went relatively unknown, flying under the public radar but, with Cyril Ramaphosa's appointment as both President of the African National Congress (ANC) and the country, South African's are naturally curious about the members of the first family. We've already introduced you to the first lady, Dr. Tshepo Motsepe-Ramaphosa, who is known to keep a very low profile.A medical doctor by profession, Motsepe-Ramaphosa holds a Master’s Degree in public health from Harvard.The first lady is the daughter of the late Chief Augustine Butana Chaane Motsepe,she is also the sister of mining magnate and Mamelodi Sundowns owner, billionaire Patrice Motsepe.ALSO READ: Meet South Africa's new first lady - Tshepo MotsepeShe is known to have a charitable side, having worked in several African countries and with several non-profit organisations. She is also the current chairperson of the African Self Help Trust (ASHA).President Ramaphosa and Dr. Motsepe - Ramaphosa reportedly have four children together, named Tumelo, Andile, Kiki and Mashudu. Not much is known about his daughters as they've kept a considerably lower profile than their brothers.Ramaphosa also has a daughter, named Tulisa from his first marriage,  to the late Nomazizi Mtshotshisana who passed in 2008 after reportedly battling a long illness. Mtshotshisa was the first African female chairperson of the New York Stock Exchange-listed Telkom.The couple were already divorced at the time of her death.His first born,  Andile Ramaphosa, who is the most outspoken of the siblings, came to his father's defense in August of last year after EFF Leader Julius Malema made public claims that Ramaphosa had beaten up his first wife. Andile tweeted: “Respectfully, this story is fake news. How would you feel if someone went around spreading lies about your parents?…totally unacceptable.”Little is known about Ramaphosa's daughter, Mashudu - this tweet by the CR17 campaign suggests a close relationship between father and daughter. Then there is Tumelo Ramaphosa, who is based in San Francisco, California. Tumelo is the CEO of StudEx Wildlife and holds a masters degree from Hult International Business College. Here is a video of the businessman talking about his company StudEx Wildlife in San Francisco and background in stock trading. WATCH BELOW: - BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE