Today, February 4, is observed as International World Cancer Day - a day when sufferers, survivors and those who know people who have been affected by the disease, create awareness about its prevention, detection and the damage it leaves in its trail. The Cancer Association of South Africa, (CANSA) has various initiatives to encourage society to raise funds for cancer fighting, education and research initiatives. These include the Gijima (Running) for Cancer event (held in KZN) and the #LaceupforCancer (Western Cape) initiative, both held today, where those who’ve lost loved ones to the disease took to the streets in their honour. According to the association, cancer cases are expected to continue rising. It’s estimated that 8.2 million people die from the disease worldwide each year, of which 4 million are premature deaths (ages 30 to 69 years). Over the next 10 years it’s projected that cancer deaths will increase to more than 14 million per year. CANSA CEO Elize Joubert said this year’s theme for World Cancer Day is “I can. We can.” The aim is to inspire healthy cities and communities to fight cancer.  “We recognise the vital role that schools, libraries, health clinics, service groups, sports clubs and education professionals play in promoting and educating the next generation about their health and well-being. World Cancer Day is an opportunity for teachers, librarians, students, health practitioners and parents to learn more, raise awareness, take action and engage in this critically important health issue. We invite communities across the world on February 4 to support the forward progress in the fight against cancer,” said Joubert. CANSA urges South Africans to lead more active lifestyles - battling cancer demands that communities incorporate sport-related and wellness activities into their daily routines. Physical activity has been shown to combat cancer, including: risk reduction, helping cancer patients manage the side-effects of treatment such as fatigue, depression and heart damage.  “Schools throughout South Africa need to champion healthy behaviours for learners, educators and parents. This will not only assist in the battle against cancer, it will also help to lower the cancer risk and manage other non-communicable diseases,” said Joubert. Joubert encouraged families, schools and corporates to team up with local heroes, clubs and organisations to create activities or events to bring awareness to the cancer cause and help fundraise. The popular Shavathon will be held on February 24 and 25 and in workplaces on February 26.