On Women: THESE remarks seem to highlight the patriarchal views of President Jacob Zuma.The People of the South interview foregrounds how Zuma felt that a woman’s value is measured by marriage and how many children she bears – and nothing else.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by TeadsThe Venda comments were less about appreciating another African culture, but could be deemed a sign of how Msholozi appreciated women who bow-down to men. “I wouldn’t want to stay with daughters who are not married, because that in itself is a problem in society… (Children) are important to a woman because they actually give extra training to a woman to be a mother.” (People of the South interview, 2012)“A woman would clap her hands and even lie down to show respect. I was so impressed. If I was not already married to my wives, I would go to Venda to look for a woman.” (Impendle, KwaZulu-Natal; 2013.)On CorruptionA report in City Press, 2014, cited Zuma’s leaked 2009 written submissions to the National Prosecuting Authority, where Msholozi, through his lawyers, argued for graft-related charges against him to be dropped.“Western paradigm brands this (corruption) criminal.”On NkandlaChoking on his words and overcome with emotion, a visibly seething Zuma told the National Assembly and used these words to repudiate assertions that taxpayers hadn’t funded any upgrades to his family homestead – saying he was still paying off a bond.Almost four years later, he paid R7.8 million into the fiscus after admitting in the Constitutional Court that the Secure in Comfort report – authored by former public protector Thuli Madonsela to probe irregularities in the Nkandla project – was right in saying he benefited from taxpayers for non-security upgrades to his home.“I have been convicted, painted black, called a first-class corrupt man on facts that are not tested. I take exception.” (Parliament, 2012).On the ANCDelivering a message laden with Biblical and divine references outside former president Nelson Mandela’s home in Vilakazi Street, before the party’s annual January 8 celebrations, Zuma reiterated his contention that the ANC would rule forever.“No one can stop us (ANC) because we have God on our side – He’s on our side. When the ANC was formed (in 1912), there were religious leaders who thanked the Lord for delivering to them the people’s movement.“The people have been liberated now – hence the ANC will rule until Jesus comes back to save us.” (Soweto, 2017).The light stuffGranted, Msholozi might have mispronounced the word “innuendos”, but the quote elicited a lot of laughter.  “You come with meandos; I answer with meandos – easy!” Ask me a question, I will answer the question.(Parliament, 2017).