Durban - Fancy living in a five-bedroom, five-bathroom luxury home with three swimming pools and stunning sea views?

Then be willing to part with R70 million.

That’s the price tag on a “one of a kind” listing at Zimbali Coastal Resort on the KwaZulu-Natal North Coast.

The villa is one of Seeff Dolphin Coast estate agent Andreas Wassenaar’s listings. “Every now and again we come across something really special. R70m sounds like a lot - but in US dollars this is only $6m, which provides something really spectacular,” he said.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Wassenaar, an expert on Zimbali, has lived there for 12 years and has been involved as a developer, sales and marketing director and leading estate agent since 1997.
Pictures: Seeff
If the opulent bar, dining, kitchen, formal and informal lounge and entertainment spaces which dominate the entrance level are not enough, the buyer can develop a second home on a neighbouring vacant plot. “This property is packaged for sale together with a separately registered site measuring 1 634m² of the total 4754m². This allows for the development of a second home on this site, or for the ultimate luxury of privacy,” he said.

Each bedroom has its own patio from which the unrestricted 180º sea, coastal and breaker views can be enjoyed. “The position is extraordinary, right on the ocean’s edge, and it has an incredibly wide ocean frontage so that you have amazing views from all vantage points. The house is beyond description. The interior design and architecture are something special,” Wassenaar said.
Interior views of the luxury one-of-a-kind home nestled on the North Coast.  Picture: Seeff 
The main suite takes up the entire northern wing and features a bathroom courtyard. Downstairs are four guest suites with a spacious lounge opening on to a private pool and staff quarters.

“We hope this will inspire those folks who want only the best and want to be in one of the world’s great locations,” Wassenaar said.

According to a bond calculator on Seeff’s website, with no deposit and at 10.50% interest rate the monthly bond instalment for this home would be R698 866 per month.

The Mercury