The Provincial Drug Unit seized bags full of drugs, firearms and illicit cigarettes during drug enforcement operations in the greater Durban area this week. The drug unit conducted operations in Chatsworth, Verulam and Phoenix over the last couple of days, said police spokesman Thulani Zwane. He said various hot spots were kept under surveillance. After observing drug related activity, police then pounced on the suspects.Criminal cops named and shamed In the Phoenix area, the Drug Unit identified a house where it was suspected that dealing in illicit cigarettes was taking place. When the house was raided, eight cases of cigarettes were found, with a street value of R62 500.  Zwane said a suspect fled the scene but it was expected that an arrest would be made soon as he is known in the area.  In a separate incident, a 22-year-old man was found in possession of 2000 capsules of heroin valued at about R60 000 - and an unlicensed pistol.Mom gunned down at Durban garage KwaZulu-Natal Acting Provincial Commissioner, Major General Bheki Langa thanked the community for co-operating with police. “The use of drugs is a generator of violent crimes and needs to be nipped in the bud.” The police officers later proceeded to Verulam to follow up on information. At Wick Street, police identified their target and arrested a 30-year-old man found in possession of heroin and rock cocaine with a street value of R90 000. An amount of R4 500, suspected to be proceeds from drug sales were also found on the property. The suspect appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court on Monday. When the team got to Chatsworth, they got wind of suspects who had been transporting dagga from the Eastern Cape. When they entered the suspect’s home in the Welbedacht area, police found 11, 50kg bags of dagga with a street value estimated at R30 000. Operations were also conducted in Westcliff, Chatsworth. The unit made observations at various hot spots. A 30-year-old woman was found in possession of 800 capsules of heroin with a street value of R10 000. She was charged and is expected to appear  in the Chatsworth Magistrate’s Court.