Tensions reached new highs at the Durban University of Technology on Monday after striking workers discovered that the university had apparently unilaterally docked all staff salaries.
Milton Estrice, spokesperson for the DUT crisis committee that is representing striking workers, said the university had no legal recourse to dock salaries during a protected strike. 

ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
However, DUT said it was within its legal rights to do so and trade unions were aware of this.

Estrice said the university had also docked non-striking workers’ salaries.

“They were not given pay slips nor were explanations offered as to why the amounts that were docked were docked. Also the docking is not on an equal percent basis - some people had 50% docked, others 65% and 80%, with some not getting salaries at all,” he said.

Estrice said the committee had written to management to ask for pay slips and an explanation for the deductions.

“This was management’s strong tool to cripple the strike, but it has not worked. This has instead brought workers together, so those who were trying to work despite the strike have realised that management does not discriminate. They are heartless and act unilaterally,” he said.


“DUT has no place for dictatorship and staff will root it out. Management, it seems, is not interested in resolving the wage dispute.”

Estrice said staff remained resolute that the university would not be able to operate until the salary dispute had been resolved.

A protesting DUT worker, Jerome Jamla, said on Monday he was a single parent and desperately needed this salary and increment.

“All the cupboards in my home are now empty and when I go home on Tuesday there will be nothing for my kids to eat. My children are going to starve,” Jamla said.

The strike is now well into its sixth week after wage talks were suspended due to a stalemate in negotiations between university management and trade unions.

DUT senior director of corporate affairs Alan Khan said the university had implemented the “no work, no pay” principle in line with labour legislation.

Khan said wage negotiations remained deadlocked and all lectures had been suspended until further notice.

Workers said they had expected Deputy Minister of Higher Education and Training Buti Manamela to intervene and address them, along with DUT vice-chancellor Thandwa Mthembu on Monday . 

However, when Manamela failed to arrive, the workers claimed that Mthembu had written to him, promising he would have resolved the strike by on Monday.

However, Khan said the university had not asked the minister to intervene but it had sent regular progress 
reports on the strike to Minister of Higher Education Hlengiwe Mkhize.
The Mercury