Durban - A parolee accused of the rape and murder of a 107-year-old grandmother in Howick has abandoned his bail application as he does not feel safe.The 36-year-old man who cannot be named until he has pleaded, appeared in the Howick Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday on charges of housebreaking, murder and rape of Girley Phillipina  Maphumulo. He also stands accused of choking one of the two high school-going granddaughter’s with whom the centenarian lived. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by TeadsSpeaking to The Mercury outside court, the woman’s family said they had since discovered that the man lives in their neighbourhood not far from their home. But, they said they did not know him as he had only recently been released on parole. The murdered woman’s son Enoch Maphumulo was in the front row of a packed public gallery when the man appeared. Speaking outside court, Enoch said he was surprised the man had told the court he was too scared for his safety to apply for bail. “Did he think we would not be angry? We are so disturbed and hurt by what he did, how could he do this to such an old woman?” he asked.Enoch described his mother as a strong, loving woman who had cared for her three children, 11 grandchildren and “many” great grandchildren. “As she got older we made sure we bought her a cake on every birthday. She loved cake and sweets and she still had teeth to eat meat.”He said his mother had worked as a domestic worker in her younger years and outlived her husband and four other children. Despite her old age, he said she had walked everywhere. “She walked almost every day to my brother’s house, a distance even I would struggle with, but she hobbled along, saying it was what kept her healthy,” said Enoch. In court, the man has asked for legal representation and said he did not want bail as he did not feel safe. Led by local councillor Thulani Mthalane, members of the Mpophomeni community picketed outside court and handed over a memorandum to court officials addressed to the Departments of Justice - demanding the man not be released on bail until the matter is finalised - and Correctional Services, for his parole to be rescinded. They gave the departments seven days to respond to their grievances. The man is due back in court on February 9. The Mercury