More than 500 police firearms were either lost or stolen in KwaZulu-Natal over the past three years, a parliamentary reply to the DA has revealed.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

DA MPL Rishigen Viranna said the reply he received from KZN MEC for Community Safety and Liaison, Mxolisi Kaunda reveals that 478 service weapons were stolen and 89 lost between 2014 and 2017.

The police station that lost the most firearms is Umkomaas while Durban Central recorded the highest number of weapons stolen from police officers.

So far only 94 firearms have been recovered while the reply further reveals that of all these cases only one officer was dismissed after a disciplinary hearing. 

“This despite 34 internal SAPS investigations having been concluded. The reply also confirms that there are 43 disciplinaries that are currently ongoing,” he said.

Viranna said his party “regards the sheer number of weapons that are now in the wrong hands as horrific when one considers the possible consequences.”

He said negligence by police officers was adding to the growing illegal firearm problem in  the province.

“Certainly, it is a major contributory factor to the prevailing atmosphere of violence and crime in our province while many communities continue to live in fear. Equally concerning is the lack of accountability from SAPS officers. That only one individual has been dismissed as a result of a disciplinary process speaks volumes about the ‘care less’ attitude within the ranks of the provincial SAPS.”

Viranna said the DA will, conduct oversight visits to the Umkhomaas and Durban Central police stations to establish what is being done to curb the problem of firearm theft and losses. 

“We will also seek to determine the underlying conditions at the root of the problem as well as the reasons for the lack of accountability from officers. KZN’s people deserve to live in an environment where they are not afraid in their own homes, where children can go to school and play in parks without being harmed and where businesses can grow and create the jobs that are so desperately needed, Viranna said.


Violence monitor Mary de Haas said she was not quite surprised at these revelations saying this has been happening for years due to slack controls. She said those who lose guns should be held accountable. “This includes stations commissioners in cases where guns are lost at the stations because they are supposed to ensure that there are proper checks. There are very strict laws about guns and it is quite serious when police lose guns,” de Haas said.
The Mercury