President Jacob Zuma’s nephew Inkosi Simphiwe Zuma has called on his uncle to give up the fight and resign following Tueday's ANC national executive committee (NEC) decision to recall Zuma.
Simphiwe said he was speaking in his personal capacity and not on behalf of the family, who have yet to meet and discuss the NEC’s 
decision.

“I now agree that he should step down, because the ANC has taken the decision, which we have to respect.

“But it will be up to him to comply as I have not spoken to him. I know that he is an intelligent man who will not disobey his party decision, but the ANC must be warned that there are lots of people who will not vote because of this decision. Many people came to the ANC because of him,” he said.

Simphiwe’s latest comment contradicted the one he made late last week, where he said the family preferred Zuma to continue to fight for his job and allow the NEC to recall him and risk dividing the party further in KwaZulu-Natal.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I am disappointed as he has been removed before he completed his responsibilities.

“But it is hurting me to see the ANC allowing itself to be controlled by opposition parties. The ANC has succumbed to pressure from opposition parties, while some in the party have influenced this decision for their own selfish ends,” he said.

He said it was clear that even Cyril Ramaphosa would be fired before the end of his term if the ANC did not resolve the issue of two centres of power. He said Zuma should now dedicate most of his time to his family, “to make it 
prosperous”.

However, Nkandla municipal mayor Thamsanqa Ntuli, an IFP member, said the recall was a positive move.

When the IFP unseated the ANC in the municipality in 2012, it made national headlines as it was seen as a sign that local voters did not have confidence in Zuma.

Ntuli said the community of Nkandla was excited when Zuma became president in 2009 as they had expected one of their own would transform the underdeveloped rural town.

“But that did not happen and as a result people of Nkandla voted for the IFP. They did not see progress when Zuma was president,” he said.
The Mercury