Durban - A rise in racial tensions and xenophobic sentiments in KwaZulu-Natal has led the provincial government to take action to foster social cohesion.
The province, on Wednesday, launched the KwaZulu-Natal Social Cohesion and Moral Regeneration Council, which will be co-chaired by Anglican Bishop Rubin Phillip and Premier Willies Mchunu.
The council will consist of 30 government and 64 non-government members - who represent business, faith-based, labour and youth structures in the province. 
The call for social cohesion and the birth of the council was first discussed when sporadic attacks on African foreign nationals started in 2014 and again when armed groups stated their intention to move all African foreign nationals out of KwaZulu-Natal. 
“These attacks remain a source of embarrassment and we do not want to see them ever again,” acting Premier and MEC for Economic Development and Tourism Sihle Zikalala said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Zikalala told representatives from religious, cultural and social organisations that he believed “through unity in action, we can move KZN to a prosperous future”.
Breaking down the terms of reference for the council, Zikalala said the 94-member council was meant to provide a platform for engagement between stakeholders who have a contribution to make towards deepening social cohesion, moral regeneration and nation-building.
The council will advise the provincial and local government structures and civil society on appropriate responses towards social cohesion. 
“This council must serve to guide the development of a social cohesion and moral regeneration strategy, and plan for the province and oversee its implementation. 
“They need to guide processes aimed at facilitating open dialogue among structures of civil society and promote co-operation of civil society sectors,” he said. 
One of the major tasks for the council will be to mobilise “emergency task teams”, whose role is to address volatile and emergency situations proactively. 
“The principle of unity in diversity is based on the respect we have for one another, and it is a set of shared values that forms the foundation of our endeavours to deepen social cohesion and moral regeneration in this province,” Zikalala said.
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads