Durban - The Essential Services Committee (ESC) has been urged to classify members of school management teams as part of essential services to ensure a minimum presence of staff at schools during teacher strikes and for the safety of pupils.
The committee, which falls under the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA), is holding public hearings across the country on whether a minimum service level should be declared for school staff. It was in Durban this past week.

ESC-controlled services in the public sector are considered essential and are therefore prevented from striking. 

The SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) has declared that they will “vehemently” oppose any attempts to declare sections of the education ­system an essential service.

DA spokesperson on Education, Dr Rishigen Viranna, made a submission to the committee arguing that a minimum service level must be established at schools so that children were not left unattended during strikes or union meetings.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It’s not all teachers who we want declared essential service. It is the principal and the deputy principal, the catering, the cleaning staff, those ­involved in the care of pupils at boarding schools and those involved with Early Childhood Development.”

He said pupils boarding at Comtech High School in uMlazi had been left unattended following a strike close to the school recently. In May, unpaid Grade R teachers abandoned their classes and went to protest in Pietermaritzburg.

“Establishing a minimum service level for school staff will allow pupils the freedom to learn in a safe environment. If children are not safe at school, their chances of achieving academically and securing future jobs are sabotaged,” he said. 

Viranna said they were concerned about Sadtu’s opposition to the proposal. 

“There were many union members from Sadtu present during the submissions who were intimidating some of those who wanted to speak,” he said. 

Allen Thompson of the ­National Teachers Union (Natu) said they would also oppose the proposal.

“We will be sending a comprehensive response to Pretoria in the coming weeks. When there is a strike, pupils are sent home and the school gates are locked,” he said. 

Bheki Shandu, the Deputy Provincial Secretary for Sadtu, said they objected to declaring even parts of the education system an essential service. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The DA missed the point in their submissions. When there is a strike, there are no pupils at school. They cannot say the management at school must be an essential service because every school has about five managers. How will they look after 600 children?” 
The Mercury