Durban - King Edward Hospital has had to relocate some of its services and patients, as major repair work on storm-damaged areas of the facility begins.
The storm in October last year had caused extensive damage to eight theatres, resulting in a backlog of surgical operations. 

Department of Health spokesperson Ncumisa Mafunda said this in turn led to patients staying longer at the hospital while, at the same time, the storm had led to a bed shortage. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The hospital’s major orthopaedics cases are now being handled at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital and maxillofacial surgery is taking place at St Aidan’s Hospital. 

Related ArticlesVaccine crisis in hospitals affects newborn babies#DurbanStorm: Hospital wall collapse kills two, death toll risesAfter giving birth, mothers are transferred to St Aidan’s and Clairwood hospitals, while dermatology and haematology patients are being admitted in two wards at King Dinuzulu Hospital. 

“King Edward is able to admit patients who still need intensive investigations in two wards, said Mafunda. 

Several wards, including maternity, labour, surgical, ICU and high care were also impacted. 

“Fortunately, no records were lost as a result of the storm,” she said. 

The hospital was hit hard by torrential rains and gusting winds brought by a storm, which wreaked havoc in the greater Durban area last October. 

Shortly afterwards, on the completion of an assessment, Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said the cost of repairs was about R25million. 

The funds, said Mafunda, had come from the National Treasury. 

Work had already begun to remove damaged asbestos roof sheets and to replace the entire roof with iron sheets. As early as a month after the storm, minor leak repairs were done. 

While Mafunda acknowledged that staff had to work in an “uncomfortable environment,” she said the hospital’s systems and environment had been reviewed to ensure safety.

According to Mandla Shabangu, provincial secretary of the Democratic Nursing Organisation of South Africa (Denosa), some nurses were relocated to King Dinuzulu Hospital. 

While Shabangu said they understood that the storm was unforeseen, the department should have consulted their members before relocating them. 

He said they wanted the department to reimburse staff for the cost and inconvenience of having to travel further for work. 

Patience

However, Mafunda said hospital management was in regular communication with staff and thanked them for their “patience, co-operation and dedication that has been demonstrated in sustaining services against all odds”.

To the affected public, she also apologised on the department’s behalf, saying it will continue to accelerate its efforts to ensure that the public has access to services that they need.

“Management of King Edward VIII Hospital would like to plead with the public to use health facilities near their homes and only come to King Edward when referred. 

“This will assist the hospital in using beds for patients who need the expertise of specialists,” she said. 

This will be until services are restored to normal in a few months, as construction is expected to be completed by December. 

The department said the repair work would also involve modernising the hospital to be in line with all aspects of infection prevention and control, as required by the Office of Health Standards and Compliance. 
The Mercury