Durban - A meeting meant to ease tensions between local and foreign small business owners in KwaMashu degenerated into chaos on Thursday  as locals accused the government of reneging on its 
promise to close foreign-owned 
businesses.
About 300 local business people operating tuck shops in the township north of Durban and surrounding areas, were due to receive their business licences at the event, to formalise their trading.

However, locals people led by the North Region Business Association (Noba), objected to 
the meeting and protested outside the venue, leading to its cancellation. 

The hall, which had been prepared with a sound system, entertainment and catering remained empty.

Outside the gate, chants of “When are the foreigners leaving?”and  “We don’t want foreigners here!” could be heard from the crowd of about 150 people.

eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede, who was to attend the event, did not arrive and the crowds accused some of her officials of failing them. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu, who arrived at the event, expressed concern about the protests and told media that he had ordered the police to have officers on standby and to be vigilant against possible xenophobic violence.

Over the past few months, there has been tension between the local traders and foreigners in the Inanda, Ntuzuma and KwaMashu townships. The locals feel there are too many foreign-owned tuck shops which are pushing them out of business.

In May, Noba had ordered the foreigners to stop operating, prompting government intervention. 

It was then agreed that the government would undertake research to determine how many foreigners were operating there and begin a formal process of controlling the 
business environment by issuing licences.

The first formal process, identifying and issuing licences to locals who qualified, had been completed. The second phase, determining how many foreigners qualify for a licence, is under way. 

Mandla Sibaya of Noba  said: “If we take these licences, our demand will not be met. All these foreign businesses should be closed while we are still busy with the licensing process, but the government does not want that. 

“If we take these licences, the government will claim 
an agreement has been reached between us and the foreigners.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We understand there are foreigners who are also supposed to benefit, which is a problem for us. We are concerned as to how they could get licences because we have no idea who they are and where they are coming from,” he said. 

“We want foreigners to close shop, we have no problems with them in our community, we have a problem with them getting involved  with ‘our’ work.”

Councillor Sipho Kaunda, chairperson of the Economic Development and Planning Committee in eThekwini, 
said they were surprised by 
the protest. 

“We are now finding new demands from the people and we now have to go back to them to find out what is it they now want. 

“They are saying they want the foreigners who operate shops to leave the area, but we as the municipality must follow due process. 

“Some in the crowd are making it clear they do not want foreigners to get licen­ces,” he said. 

“It’s clear that we missed a step, that was when all the processes had been completed, we should have gone back 
to the community and informed them. 

“We will be meeting with the community leaders on Monday to address these issues,” Mchunu said. 

He added that he was concerned about what might happen this weekend before the scheduled meeting.

“I have told the police to be vigilant. 

“I fear there might be attacks as there seem to be people intent on causing chaos. I will also be speaking to the provincial commissioner and the minister, Bheki Cele.”

Attempts to reach the KZN Somali Community Council were unsuccessful. 
The Mercury