Durban - The Black First Land First (BLF) organisation has laid charges of tobacco trafficking, money laundering, fraud, corruption, bribery and tax evasion against tobacco manufacturer Adriano Mazzotti.
Accompanied by a group of supporters, BLF leader Andile Mngxitama laid the charges at the Durban Central police station at the weekend.
BLF said the charges are based on Mazzotti’s own affidavit which he allegedly made to the South African Revenue Service (Sars) in 2014.
Part of the contents of the affidavit is contained in Jacques Pauw’s bestseller, The President’s Keepers.
Related ArticlesBLF's Andile Mngxitama in hot water over 'house negro' talkLOOK: BLF, AfriForum's Kallie Kriel in scuffle outside #DuduzaneZuma courtMazotti, a director of tobacco manufacturing company Carnilinx, allegedly admits to various transgressions including an attempt to bribe senior officials at Sars, fraud, money laundering, tobacco smuggling and tax evasion.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He also admits to making a donation of R200000 to a political party, believed to be the Economic Freedom Fighters which has admitted to receiving a donation from the businessman.
The party has been defending the donation saying it had never hidden it but had, in fact, declared the donation publicly and that the funds were used to register for the 2014 elections.
The BLF claims in its affidavit that the money donated to the EFF could be proceeds of crime and should be investigated.
The EFF has said if the money was found to be proceeds of crime, the party said it would be willing to return it as it would never knowingly accept proceeds of crime.
In his affidavit, submitted to the police, Mngxitama states that while in his affidavit Mazotti admits guilt, “it is nonetheless important that a thorough investigation be conducted by the SAPS and Hawks so as to ensure that any statement of guilt by Mazzotti covers all the details of the relevant crimes he has committed”.
Mngxitama said it was shocking that various state institutions hadnever preferred any charges against Mazotti, adding that this was proof that the businessman was being protected from any prosecution.
“BLF will be pursuing the charges against Mazzotti to its finality. Whoever else is found to be implicated with Mazzotti will be charged in due course. We shall not rest until true justice is obtained against the white monopoly capital criminal,” Mngxitama said.
Speaking of his intentions, Mngxitama said it was untrue that he was indirectly going after his chief political rivals, the EFF.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We are incapable of going after black people. We do not target black people, even those we disagree with. We are not interested in Malema all we are interested in is the self-confessed criminal,” he said.
Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said police had opened an inquiry into the matter.
The Mercury was unable to reach Mazotti for comment on Sunday.
The Mercury