EThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede yesterday recounted how, as a young girl, she would walk many kilometres barefoot to school.
This, she said, is what shaped her and made her a strong leader. Gumede said this while visiting her former school in Amaoti, where her foundation with the help of businessman Vivian Reddy and the Sibaya Community Trust donated an administration block and ablution facilities.
Addressing the children at the Welile Moshoeshoe (formerly Amaoti No1) Primary School, Gumede said she was proof that even those who come from poor backgrounds could beat the odds to become whatever they wanted.
Pupils and teachers were jubilant in welcoming the mayor, Reddy, who was accompanied by his wife Sorisha, and other prominent guests to the school.
Welile Moshoeshoe is one of the schools adopted by the mayor, who said it was very close to her heart and that she had made it her mission to better the conditions there.
She heaped praise on Reddy, saying other businesspeople should emulate his example by giving to the needy.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Explaining his involvement, Reddy said he had been approached by the mayor’s foundation following a pledge he had made to support one of the foundation’s programmes.
“When I saw the conditions at this school where the toilets were not working and the teachers did not have a staffroom and were sitting in their cars using that as an office, we had to act. We found that the children did not have a shelter at the assembly area,” he said.
After handing over the new the facilities. Reddy also made a pledge to build a playground at the school. 
Because of the school’s rocky and uneven surface, this would require the construction of a deck.
“It is going to cost us a million rand or more. We have already spent a million rand at the school, but to create a safe environment is a small price to pay to ensure the safety of the children at the school,” Reddy said.
The playground will be dedicated to the memory of one of the pupils who died at the school, apparently after falling and hitting her head on a boulder.
Clad in a Mandela Day T-shirt, Reddy said that by ­focusing on children’s welfare and education he was following in the footsteps of his “close friend”, Nelson Man­dela.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“If we as business don’t get involved in looking after our children, we cannot say we are successful at business. Success is all about how you share your wealth. That is why we, as Sibaya Trust, look at programmes through which we can uplift the lives of others,” he said.
School principal Dominic Mfeka said the new facilities at the school would no doubt have a positive impact on the quality of education that the more than 1700 pupils were getting.
“This means that we no longer battle with the stench of pit latrine toilets because now we have flushing toilets. So what is happening today is going to boost us; it is going to boost our performance. We are thankful to Mam Zandile Gumede, and our sponsor Mr Vivian Reddy,” he said.
Gumede also announced plans to build a new school, to which some of the pupils at Welile Moshoeshoe would be relocated. This was welcomed by the principal, who said the school was overcrowded with 1700 pupils crammed into 23 classrooms. 
Mfeka said his school needed about 15 more classrooms.