Durban - UDM leader Bantu Holomisa has applied for leave to appeal a judgment that ­effectively gagged him from badmouthing the Lebashe ­Investment Group and its top officials, including non-executive ­director and former finance deputy minister Jabu Moleketi.
This followed Holomisa’s allegations against individuals and companies, which include Harith General Partners and Harith Fund Managers (of which Moleketi is chairman), and the Public Investment Corporation (PIC).

The companies and individual business people turned to court to obtain an urgent interdict against to stop  Holomisa and his party from ­defaming them in publications, broadcasts or on social media, arguing that his allegations were false.

Judge Vivian Tlhapi granted the interdict, but said she would later give her reasons for her ruling.

The applicants turned to court after Holomisa wrote a letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa last month, on a UDM letterhead, with the heading “Unmasking Harith and Lebashe’s alleged fleecing of the Public Investment Corporation”. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The letter was also published on the UDM’s website and on Holomisa’s Twitter account, where he ­refers to the “PIC scandal”. 

Holomisa and his party, in terms of the order, had three days to ­remove the posts, including those on social media. Holomisa tweeted yesterday that an application seeking leave to appeal the judgment had been filed yesterday afternoon.

In the leave to appeal application, it is argued that Holomisa, as a member of Parliament, enjoys protection under section 58 of the constitution, and therefore has privilege to make the statements he made.

It was also argued that the statements made were not derogatory, as the public would view the statements as allegations that would have to be tested ,and were aware of the notion of “innocent until proven guilty”.

“Allegations of wrongdoing are routinely made against many persons, and reasonable members of the public do not merely assume simply because allegations are made, that such allegations are true or the persons against whom the ­allegations are made are guilty.” 

It was further argued that even if the claims made were defamatory, they were “truthful and of public benefit”.

The application also said that had the “constitutional context” been considered, then the order against the party and Holomisa would not have been granted.

Lebashe said in court papers that the letter to the president was intended to mean that the applicants were unlawfully and intentionally engaged in a number of schemes, fraud and conspiracies with the result that funds from the PIC were being misappropriated by them. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The company said the letter further meant to suggest that innocent members of the public, whose money was invested in the PIC, were the victims of a series of thefts perpetrated by the applicants on a grand scale.

Lebashe said the vast majority of the allegations in Holomisa’s letter “are plainly false”. 

Holomisa had contended, in his response to the application, that the UDM believed that the structure,  flow of funds and roles of the personalities were sufficient to create the perception that PIC funds had been used in conflict with the Public Investment Corporation Act. - (Additional reporting by Mercury Reporter.)
THE MERCURY