Durban - Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi’s family wants to celebrate his 90th birthday and illustrious political career while he is still alive and intends to do so in the company of his longstanding friends from around the world.
The Buthelezi Legacy Celebration Committee, headed by his son Prince Zuzile Buthelezi, said the founder and long-time leader of the IFP was hoping to celebrate on August 27 with guests including Prince Charles and former Zambian president Kenneth Kaunda.
The committee is responsible for the preparation of events to celebrate his life.
However, Prince Zuzile said that the invitations were subject to confirmation by Kaunda and Prince Charles, as well as other invited guests from around the world.
Prince Zuzile said the idea for the series of events had originated from the broader family, including his beloved wife Princess Irene, as it was “apt” that they celebrate their father’s life as a family.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We felt that when we were growing up we were being crowded out in terms of his affections, but as we grew up we understood better.
“We thought when we celebrate his life as he turns 90 it was important that we invite all our friends and all those people who have meant a lot to him because they’re the ones who made it possible to achieve whatever he has achieved,” Prince Zuzile said. 
Perhaps they’re taking a cue from acclaimed American rapper Kanye West’s song Big Brother from his 2007 studio album Graduation where he says, If you admire somebody, you should go ahead and tell them, people never get the flowers while they can still smell them. 
Prince Zuzile said the biggest reason for the celebrations was to thank their father while he was still alive.
He said that the celebrations, which will kick off with a thanksgiving service at the Durban exhibition centre and an Umgidi (celebration party) at the Ulundi Regional Sports Complex on August 27, will climax with an invitation-only gala dinner at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre (ICC) on August 31. 
The politician’s daughter, Princess Angela Buthelezi, said that among the biggest lessons she had learnt from her father were humility, to be God-fearing and be independent “especially as females”.
“We’ve watched him being a very good husband to our mom, a very good and loving father to all of us, and our siblings who are now late and a very loving grandfather and great grandfather as our family now spans four generations.”
She also mentioned resilience, courage and a never give up attitude as other traits embodied by Buthelezi.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury