Durban - In commemoration of Nelson Mandela centenary birthday, The Mercury spoke to centenaries and asked them to share advice based on many years of experience.
 101-year-old Josephine Asher was born during the 1st World War on September 9, 1916. She has been married for 69 years has one surviving son, three grandchildren and seven great grandchildren.
Here is our interview with the golden girls.
What lessons would you teach your younger self having lived over 100 years?
One thing is to believe in the Lord and work by his laws and the other is you must have a sense of humour.
 You were married for nearly 70 years, what advice can you give in terms of love, marriage and relationships?
 Well I’ve seen too many people get married who are not really in love. Love is the most important thing, to love someone. Too many people get married just for the wedding and for the lovely dress and things like that. You must love someone truly otherwise you wouldn't live with them for 69 years.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 

There are young people who often look to older people for advice and wisdom. Do you have any advice for young people?
 You must have great faith to live a good life and you must have a sense of humour, that’s very important
 What financial advice can you give young people who have just started working?
 It doesn't matter how little you have, you start saving. The minute you get your first pay packet you start saving and don’t stop. You increase your savings as you go along. People must save, who is going to look after them when they’re old. We didn't have much but we saved. We are now comfortable and have a wonderful flat and a lovely [electric] chair. It might not seem much to you but it’s fantastic.
 What are your favourite activities?AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 I love to go out and I love to dance. favourite song is the anniversary waltz.  I love to travel. I love the whole of Europe but Switzerland is my favourite place to travel to.
 Do you have any tips on how to deal with difficult friends and family?
 I would say my prayers if I were in trouble, as I do say my prayers and I think the Lord answers your prayers so we’ve always done that when we were in trouble, together.
 What is your opinion of what South Africa was like before when you were younger and now?
 When I first came, my first impression was that they[South African’s] were very polite people and they loved music and dancing and they way they looked after their families, this impressed me very much.
 And then Mandela came. I think Mandela is one of the most remarkable men who ever lived. To think he suffered so much but he read so much and educated himself so that he became what he was, which was almost a saint in my eyes.
 What was the atmosphere like in South Africa when Mandela was released from prison?
It was much better then than it is now. For some reason racism seems to be growing. Why, I don't know, there must be bad people.
 Do you have any advice to help people get along?
I don’t understand people not getting along. I've always gotten along with everybody. It doesn't matter who they are. I’ll talk to them and smile. You must smile at people otherwise you are miserable. People don't laugh as much as they did when I was young. It’s good for you to laugh. My husband and I laugh everyday. You’ve got to get along, everybody. I don't dislike anyone, not even Malema.
 Do you think laughter has kept you going all these years?
Yes of course, I have plenty pains and plenty of things wrong but if I sat all gloomy my husband would be gloomy. You’ve got to laugh.

 

What gets you through each day and keeps you going?
I think its genes, my father lived to 101. He didn't have any illness, I've had everything under the son but I’m still here so it’s obviously genes.
 Do you have any regrets or things you wish you should have done?
No because I think life is made up of worries and you just have to learn to tackle them. Oh yes, I’d love to go on the QE2[Queen Elizabeth ship] again.
 Do you have a bucket list of things that you would like to do?
No, not particularly except I love to travel. I would travel more
 Do you use social media?
No but I do have a pad and I send emails and have thousands of emails
 Do you think wisdom comes with time or experience?
I think with both, time and experience. It gives you all sides of life.
100-year-old Emmerentia Lecourt de Billot was born on June 18, 1918 in the Southern Free State. She was married twice and still enjoys the company of her second husband’s children.

 

What lessons would you teach your younger self?
I would be more tolerant of other people and the faults that I see are probably my own. Be more quieter and not so loud.
 Any tips on how to deal with difficult friends and family?
It is difficult to give people advice.
 Do you have any advice for young people?
I would say just love your family and your friends and get on with them and try to lead a peaceful and happy life.
 How do you compare South Africa back then to South Africa now? 
As governments come and go there is always change and you just have to live with it otherwise you move and go to another country which I have never wanted to do.
 What is your opinion of Nelson Mandela?
Madiba was a wonderful man, he did a lot for South Africa and he was a very special man to have understood what was required for South Africa and for people to live together peacefully.
Having been married twice, do you have any advice on love. marriage and relationships?
I think it’s always up to the individual to know how important it is to love and be loved and to act accordingly and to try to get on with people. Not always see other people’s faults when you know you have your own.

 
 

 Do you have any regrets or things that you would have liked to have done but didn't?

Oh yes, that always happens because you can't go through life always knowing exactly what you have to do. You have decisions to make, sometimes last minute decisions and just hope that they were the best that you could do at the time.
 What do you think the secret is to living so long?
Oh I wish I knew, everybody asks me that, I even think about it myself and I wonder why I lived so long while the rest of my family died years and years ago. I don’t know if it was what I ate when I was little. We had a garden. I like my vegetables and my fruit.
 Do you have any financial advice for people who have just started working?
I would say start a savings account, which I never did and that is not a good thing. You must look after the pennies. The pennies will look after themselves if you look after them. Don't be miserly, have a good life but try to save for your old age. That’s very important because you need a lot of comforts when you’re old.
 What keeps you going everyday?
Well I read a lot and I like to walk.
 Do you use social media?
Oh no, I cant use any of these modern things, just give me the old fashioned landline and telephone. I struggle sometimes with cellphones but today’s technology is just wonderful and I think the young people are very clever.
 Is there anything that you want people to know from your experiences that you feel is important?
Travel if you can, that is very important. I did a certain amount of travelling and that is an education in itself. It is worth the money you spend to go to other countries and see how other people live, look at beautiful places.
 Do you think wisdom comes with time or experience?
I would say naturally it comes with time and I would say experience, both.

The Mercury