Durban - Acting Education MEC Bongi Sithole-Moloi has dubbed KwaZulu-Natal’s matric class of 2018 the “class of hope”.
She was addressing pupils, teachers and department of ­education officials at the launch of the 100-day countdown to the Grade 12 end-of-year exams. The launch was held at the Comtech High School in uMlazi on Thursday.

Following a massive drop in the pass rate two years ago, the province obtained a 72.8% pass rate in 2017, which was a 6.4 percentage point increase from 2016’s pass rate of 66.4%. 

Addressing pupils, she said the Grade 12 class should work hard and make sacrifices in order to ensure they do well. “When your teachers wish you good luck, that means they have done all they can for you.

“You are called the class of “hope” because we hope that you will do better and improve on last year’s results. We hope that you will do us proud and we will be among the provinces that will be reported to have scored between 80% and 100%,” she said.

Sithole Moloi also had harsh words for some teachers for sending their children to study in schools “better” than where they were teaching. 

Besides the teachers being criticised, parents also came in for harsh criticism from the School Governing Body Association for not taking an interest in their children’s education by failing to attend parent-school meetings. 

Moloi Sithole said she found it strange and unacceptable that many teachers are sending their own children to schools different to the ones they worked at. 

“When I was growing up, the teachers would bring their own children to be taught at the schools where they worked. This was the guarantee that they were giving the best education possible because their children were also there,” she said. 

Using a food analogy she said: “If you had a business in the community and you sold tomato or meat.

“But the meat that you cooked at your own home you bought at Pick n Pay or the tomato you bought at Woolworths, why should people continue to buy from you?”

Sihle Mchunu, the leader of Sadtu in the Durban Region said while they have been encouraging their members to work hard throughout the year to produce good results, they were unhappy with their “exploitation”.  

“The countdown to the Grade 12 end of year began after the release of the 2017 results,” he said. 

“Our members have not had any holidays, they are working on holidays and weekends without being paid, and work at their own cost,” he said. 
The Mercury