Durban - China National Machinery Industry Corp, known as Sinomach, has several projects including agricultural machinery, construction and power generation equipment across Africa.
Speaking on the sidelines of the BRICS Business Council meeting in Durban this week, the company’s chief executive Ren Hongbin, said they were looking forward to investing more in the continent with strategic projects that place education and human capital development at its forefront.
“We want to use the opportunity of BRICS to upgrade development in South Africa and on the continent.
“Just like in China, in South Africa and in the whole of Africa, I see the strong desire of parents to see their children progress and have a good life. By 2050, Africa will be home to 2.5billion people and with half of them aged under 25, the continent’s youth population will be 10 times that of Europe. In order for us to realise the ambitions of the young people and make the investments that are needed, we need to enhance and improve the investment climate in the BRICS economies and in Africa.”
Ren said the way to transform the energy from the business council is through infrastructure development.
“We can also benefit from a relationship with the BRICS New Development Bank (NDB) as it will stimulate further business activities in the power and agriculture sectors.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We are also positive about the NDB developing financing in local currencies - this will be extremely helpful for a company like us,” he said.
Ren said easier access to NDB finance would help the BRICS countries deal with poverty, unemployment and inequality.
He said the co-operation of BRICS countries would see tremendous potential being realised in the future.
“It is important for the BRICS countries to work together, and to share expertise and skills. Every country has something unique to offer. We need to harmonise and deal with the things that are holding us back. We are ready to share our skills, knowledge and technology with the BRICS countries,” he said.
Ren said he was impressed with the NDB’s social criteria in the design, building and operations of projects, which respect the needs of local communities. 
“At Sinomach we strongly believe in people-centred development and projects. We help our communities to achieve a better future. We listen to them when they ask us to invest in education. For example, every year we are proud that we support hundreds of students from countries in Asia, Africa, Europe, Latin America and Oceania to come to learn everything in agricultural processing.”
Ren said they saw agricultural machinery and processing as a key step towards industrialisation, technical learning and innovation.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury