EDITOR'S VIEW - For how long will the ratepayers of Pietermaritzburg continue to be victims of a political administration hell-bent on collapsing their municipality?
Every week we run stories of a troubled municipality governed by individuals who have no clue how to respond to its challenges.

While municipalities are autonomous institutions, the rot at Msunduzi runs so deep that the province should have intervened a long time ago.

The latest controversy at the municipality involves municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe in the “jobs for pals” scandal. 

This comes after the emergence of an audiotape where a voice purported to be that of Hadebe is heard giving instructions on who should be hired. A scandal of a similar nature has emerged, with mayor Themba Njilo launching a fresh investigation.

As if that were not enough, last week we reported about the dismissal of Sabatha Nomnganga, former municipal manager for infrastructure, after being on suspension for 11 months.

We hold no brief for Nomnganga, but we sincerely hope that there is enough evidence to justify his axing. 

We hope the speed with which the council moved to discipline and dismiss Nomnganga can also be applied when investigating allegations against Hadebe. The municipality cannot afford to live with accusations of inconsistency in the way it deals with the wrongdoing of senior officials.

The failure of the municipality to hold council meetings because of the repeated absence of ANC councillors should be criticised. 

Ratepayers expect efficient and effective delivery of services. Anything short of that means they have failed in the mandate given to them by the electorate.

While the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, led by MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube, has intervened by deploying a team of experts to fix the mess, these measures don’t seem to have yielded positive results.

It is time for Dube-Ncube to get tough. She must move with speed to investigate allegations against the municipal manager. 

She must also place the municipality under administration, while appointing a competent administrator to change the fortunes of the council. After all, it would not be the first time Dube-Ncube has taken such a bold step against the same municipality.

The people of Pietermaritzburg deserve better.
The Mercury