Durban - The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal will for the second time, attempt to re-run its provincial conference which was declared null and void by the Pietermaritzburg High Court. Despite a rocky start, the conference finally got underway around 6:30pm.
As delegates from across the province descend on the Durban University of Technology we take a look at the main players and why the conference is being re-run.
Who are the main players?


 Sihle Zikalala,  who held the position of chairman of the KZN ANC
 Mike Mabuyakhulu, the provincial convenor of the conference
 Mdumiseni Ntuli, the former provincial spokesperson
 Super Zuma, who held the provincial secretary position


How did we get here?


 In 2015, the ANC in KZN held its provincial conference at the Royal Showgrounds in Pietermaritzburg where a faction led by Sihle Zikalala ousted a faction led by former KZN Premier, Senzo Mchunu.
 Supporters of Mchunu led by five councillors approached the courts to have the conference re-run citing procedural irregularities.



 In September 2017, the Pietermaritzburg High Court declared the KwaZulu-Natal ANC's 2015 provincial conference and the results of the conference to be unlawful.



 It also ordered the ANC to pay half of the costs of the applicants.



 In January 2018, the ANC announced a provincial task team to run the ANC’s provincial structure with Mike Mabuyakhulu the convener and Sihle Zikalala the co-ordinator. The task team’s main job was the convene a new conference.



 The conference was scheduled for June 8, at the University of Zululand.

AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 Just hours before it was meant to start, however, it had to be aborted after the Pietermaritzburg High Court granted six ANC members from Harry Gwala (Kokstad area), Moses Mabhida (Pietermaritzburg area) and Lower South Coast (Port Shepstone area) regions an interim interdict that found the attempted re-run to be “premature and unlawful”.


 So what now?


 The second attempt to run the conference began Thursday, July 19 after much deliberations between the various factions. Part of these deliberations according to reports was for a compromise slate comprising of leaders of the two factions being elected to key positions.

 

 What can be expected?

 

 
  According to various media reports, in an effort to bring unity to the province, Zikalala is set to be nominated unopposed, as is provincial convenor Mike Mabuyakhulu to the position of deputy chair.
 



 Former provincial spokesperson Mdumiseni Ntuli is the favourite for the coveted and powerful provincial secretary position



Who else is expected to attend the conference?


 President Cyril Ramaphosa was expected to speak at the opening of the conference.


Daily News