Durban - South Africa is edging closer to reaching its ambitious target of attracting $100billion (R1.327 trillion) worth of investments, with its BRICS partner China expected to announce a massive investment injection in the coming weeks.
This is the view expressed by Anil Sooklal, South Africa’s BRICS Sherpa, who was speaking during a BRICS round-table discussion in Richards Bay on Tuesday.
The talk is one of the events being held ahead of the BRICS Business Council meeting which kicks off in Durban on Sunday and the BRICS Summit and Business Forum to be held in Joburg later this month.
The meetings are expected to be used as platforms to facilitate foreign direct investment into the country as part of trying to boost the sluggish economy.
These meetings will also be used to strengthen economic ties while at the same time showcasing South Africa and the opportunities available in the country.
Sooklal said the international community was now showing renewed confidence in the country and its leadership, adding that China is expected to invest more than $30bn in South Africa.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“There is renewed confidence and refocusing in South Africa, not just from the BRICS countries but globally,” said Sooklal, who recently accompanied President Cyril Ramaphosa on an investor roadshow to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia.
He said he expects that China, one of South Africa’s biggest trading partners, will even top the investments the country has been promised by the Saudis and UAE.
Sooklal said about 1100 journalists had registered for the BRICS summit in a clear sign that the world will be focusing on South Africa.
Sello Rasethaba, a member of the 25-member BRICS Business Council, also expressed confidence that China would invest more in South Africa than what Saudi Arabia and UAE had committed.
The BRICS Business Council comprises five businesspeople from each of the member countries with the South African chapter being chaired by Sekunjalo chairman Dr Iqbal Survé.
Rasethaba said while South Africa was a small economy compared to other BRICS partners it was treated equally by its partners.
He added that there was a perception that the BRICS meetings were “high-level things”, which was not true as they could provide trade opportunities for small entrepreneurs.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The BRICS Business Forum in Joburg will also include an exhibition by the entrepreneurs. “BRICS is real, it will encourage even the small village entrepreneur to export goods,” he said.
Rasethaba said the country would have to work hard to turn its fortunes around.
Sooklal said BRICS had led to bilateral relations between member countries being accentuated.
Since South Africa last hosted the BRICS summit in 2013 there have been many positives, including the establishment of the BRICS development bank. Since its establishment, the bank has disbursed more than $5bn in loans and will now be looking to lending to the private sector.
Gary Bell, chief executive of Bell Equipment, implored the country to do more in terms of the beneficiation of raw materials.
“We need to start adding some value right here at home. Every country sees exports as a victory in the game and imports as defeat. We really need to change the game and I’m quite encouraged by the new approach,” he said.
Bell said the country has the necessary skills and human resources to take it to the next level.
Earlier in the day the panellists, business leaders and media representatives attending the event were taken on a tour around the Richards Bay Industrial Development Zone (RBIDZ), which has signed investments worth more than R11bn.
Pumi Motsoahae, the chief executive of the RBIDZ, said the zone had attracted investments from different parts of the world in sectors such as chemicals, pipe manufacturing and renewable energy. This included R1.4bn from a company in Singapore.
Sooklal said there were many opportunities that South Africans needed to exploit, adding that there was no reason why the economy could not grow by 4% to 5%.
He added the country needed to scale up its trade with other BRICS countries.
The Mercury