Durban - The Treatment Action Campaign has demanded that thousands of vacant posts be filled urgently as part of addressing KwaZulu-Natal’s “broken” healthcare system.
The organisation said that of about 79 000 funded posts, 70 000 had been filled, leaving about 8 900 vacant posts. 

This, the organisation said this  translated to more than 11% of the provincial workforce. 

“However, instead of filling vacant posts and ensuring that there are enough people to properly deliver healthcare, some posts are instead being frozen while many doctors and nurses remain unemployed.”

This is according to the TAC’s State of Health in KZN report, which the organisation’s provincial manager, Mzamo Zondi, said had been presented to Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo and head of department Dr Musa ­Gumede last week. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Fixing the health system in KZN is an emergency. The many persistent challenges that plague the provincial health system require an ­urgent and comprehensive turnaround strategy,” said Zondi. 

He said the report had been compiled from data collected from a 24-question survey conducted in 44 of the organisation’s branches in four districts - eThekwini, King Cetshwayo, iLembe, and ­uMgungundlovu. 

Among the key concerns noted in the report is the “critical” human resource shortage of nurses, doctors, specialists and community healthcare workers. 

The report found that 10 out of 28 facilities did not have enough staff. Staff shortages led to long waiting times, patients being turned away and medicine shortages as staff were too busy to place orders in time. 

The TAC believes this contributes to the exodus of workers to the private sector for better working conditions, job satisfaction and pay. “Staff are exhausted, stressed, under-resourced and overburdened, contributing to the worsening of attitudes and a lack of compassion shown ­towards patients.”

However, interactions with staff at the majority of facilities were generally considered to be friendly, the report found. 

Dr Mvuyisi Mzukwa, the chairperson of the KZN Coastal Branch of the SA Medical Association (Sama), echoed the TAC’s sentiments. 

As a trauma unit doctor at King Edward Hospital, Mzukwa said the situation was so dire, Sama had written to Premier Willies Mchunu on Friday. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We have been working with the department, but their approach is very slow. They don’t seem to realise how ­serious the situation is. We have been stretching ourselves to accommodate patients. 

“We can’t attend to all of them so we are forced to pick and choose those likely to respond (to treatment).”

Negligence

Mzukwa said the circumstances they worked under could lead to negligence. The TAC said KZN had spent more than R240million in legal claims because of negligence. 

The TAC demanded the release of the province’s human resources plan, and that  all ­vacant posts be filled in the next financial year. 

The report also contained demands regarding access to healthcare in rural areas, proper maintenance, repair and purchase of infrastructure and equipment, a stronger TB and HIV response, more ambulances and paramedics as well as proper accountability structures within the department. 

Following the TAC’s meeting with Dhlomo and Gumede, department spokesperson Ncumisa Mafunda said the department noted and welcomed the report, and would respond to the TAC in due course. Gumede said there would be regular engagement between the department and the TAC.
The Mercury