Durban - The Delangokubona Business Forum has accused the city’s councillors of meddling in the refuse collection tender, leading to chaos as refuse removal is disrupted in various parts of the municipality.
uMlazi, Kwamakhutha, Umbumbulu, Isipingo, Folweni and Cato Manor were the worst affected areas as sub-contractors once again went on a rampage, forcing Durban Solid Waste (DSW) trucks to offload rubbish into the roads, including on the N2 near uMlazi and Amanzimtoti.
By Monday night, no solution had been found to the impasse and the forum threatened that if the authorities failed to pay the subcontractors, they would start dumping garbage in suburbs to escalate their protest.
At the centre of the problem is the unhappiness by sub-contractors, who claim they are owed money for services rendered in May and June, before the end of the previous contract.
About 89 such contractors, operating in uMlazi, have not been paid what is due to them and blame the city for this despite being sub-contracted to the four main contractors who signed the contract with the city.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury understands from senior officials at the municipality that payment had been withheld for some of the main contractors, as the city wanted them to provide proof of work done.
A contractor, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said this was impossible as some of the landfills did not have weighbridges. 
“It is about to get brutal,” said one official, warning of a pending disaster if the matter was not resolved.
The disputed contract came to an end last month and the city tried to deploy its own staff members to areas like uMlazi, but some had to be withdrawn after receiving death threats, a source said.
Nathi “Bhamuza” Mnyandu, the president of the forum said the sub-contractors had done all in their power to ensure that service delivery was not impacted and to service their contract.
“We even agreed to lower the amounts we were getting from R28 686 to R24 000 so as to accommodate the other companies they (the politicians) wanted accommodated in this tender. They have politicised this thing when all we want is to get paid for what we worked for,” he said.
He claimed that some politicians in the city had imposed sub-contractors on the main contractors, describing them as nothing but “ghost companies that benefited from the contract”.
The 89 sub-contractors went to the city hall yesterday seeking a meeting with the council’s leadership, but this did not materialise.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Mnyandu threatened that the protests would continue until they received what was due to them.
eThekwini municipality spokesperson, Mandla Nsele said the city would enlist the services of law enforcement agencies to ensure that DSW trucks were escorted.
“The City is working around the clock to resolve the situation. Residents will be notified accordingly, when collection in the affected areas resumes. 
“The municipality urges residents to keep all refuse within their property boundaries to avoid litter from spreading all over. We would like to apologise for the inconvenience caused to residents by the non-collection of refuse,” Nsele said.
The DSW employees working in uMlazi told The Mercury that they had to pull out after they were threatened that they would be shot if they continued working in the area.
Parboo Sewpersad, spokesperson for Metro Police, said his unit was monitoring the southern parts of the city very closely, even using unmarked cars. 
“Right now we are monitoring the south and we are escorting trucks but, should it spread to other areas, we do have a backup plan,” he said.
Mthunzi Gumede, spokesperson for the eThekwini mayor, said the “recent events were unfortunate” as the city leadership had worked hard to ensure that the impasse was resolved. 
He said the relevant departments were expected to brief the city’s executive committee meeting on the progress this morning.
The Mercury