Durban - The fate of Richmond municipal manager Bongiwe Mnikathi is likely to be finalised this morning when the Richmond council holds a special council meeting.
Mnikathi's future looked uncertain on Monday after a letter emerged in the media stating that she was going to be suspended by the council on allegations of wrongdoing.

The council sat on Monday  and resolved to suspend her.

A source, who asked not to be named, told The Mercury that Mnikathi clashed with some staff members when she came to collect some of her belongings from her office on Tuesday.

“After the meeting had voted to oust her, she arrived at the ­municipality with security, saying she was there to collect her items,” said a source.

“When a person says they are there to collect their documents you cannot stop them. 

“The problem started when she wanted to take boxes containing evidence of the allegations against her. 

“She clashed with staff members and security, but fortunately she was not able to leave with the documents,” said the source.

"On Wednesday, we will have a special council meeting where this issue will be dealt with.”

The speaker of the municipality, Samora Ndlovu, declined to comment on the matter, but confirmed that Mnikathi had arrived at the council offices on Tuesday. 
He said the council would ­release a statement today detailing what had happened at the meeting.

Asked whether the council had informed Mnikathi of her suspension, he said: “I cannot speak about that as the council has not mandated me to speak on the matter. All I can say is that the council of Richmond is active and its councillors are working.”   

Attempts to reach Mnikathi were unsuccessful.
The IFP spokesperson on co-operative governance and traditional affairs, Princess Phumzile Buthelezi, said Cogta MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube must intervene in the matter.

“We are calling on the MEC to take an active role in resolving the crisis as ANC factional politics seem to affect the proper running of the municipality. 

“We believe that due and fair processes must be followed if and when the municipal manager is ousted.

“We call on the MEC to ensure that allegations of corruption levelled against the municipal manager are investigated thoroughly and dealt with properly,” she said. 
The Mercury