Johannesburg - Duduzane Zuma has returned to Dubai to be with his pregnant wife, his lawyer confirmed on Monday. 
Duduzane's lawyer Rudi Krause confirmed to IOL that Duduzane had left on Friday night to be with his wife, who Duduzane had previously described as "substantially pregnant".
"Yes, I can confirm that my client has left for Dubai," Krause said. 
Related Articles#DuduzaneZuma back in dock on culpable homicide chargesDuduzane Zuma granted bail of R100 000 in corruption caseDuduzane Zuma to finally face the music four years after fatal car crash#DuduzaneZuma back in dock on culpable homicide chargesDuduzane Zuma granted bail of R100 000 in corruption caseDuduzane Zuma to finally face the music four years after fatal car crash#DuduzaneZuma back in dock on culpable homicide charges12He added that the trip was in compliance with Duduzane's bail conditions, which allow for him to travel, and that he would be back in time to appear in the Randburg Magistrates' Court on August 23 where he is facing culpable homicide charges. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Duduzane is being charged with the deaths of two taxi passengers following an accident in February 2014. 
Zimbabwe national Phumzile Dube died after Duduzane's Porsche collided with the taxi in which she was travelling. Another passenger Nanki Jeanette Mashaba‚ who was injured in the accident‚ later died in hospital.
The son of former president Jacob Zuma is also out on R100 000 bail following another appearance at the Specialised Commercial Crimes Court in Joburg on July 9 to face corruption charges.
This is in relation to a R600 million bribe allegedly offered to then deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. 
He was released under strict bail conditions which included reporting to the Rosebank Police Station daily and informing the investigating officer if he needs to travel outside Gauteng. 
Zuma, who will be residing in Saxonwold, told the court that he left his wife in Dubai as she was “substantially pregnant”. 
That corruption case was postponed to January 24, 2019. 
 IOL