Durban - The Department of Social Development is investigating allegations of sexual abuse, ill-treatment and exploitation at a Durban centre for people with mental illnesses, including sexual assault which was reported on Wednesday. Head of department Nokuthula Khanyile was last week tasked by Social Development MEC Weziwe Thusi to conduct a probe after two families of mentally ill people living at the Durban and Coastal Mental Health centre came forward.
“If the allegations are true, it will be a sad day. I have asked the head of department to investigate to ensure the centre complies with norms and standards and mental health patients receive the treatment they deserve,” said Thusi. 

The allegations also caught the attention of the DA’s health spokesperson Dr Imran Keeka, who conducted an oversight visit to the facility in Sherwood on Wednesday. 

Gita Harie, executive director of Durban and Coastal Mental Health, said one allegation of sexual abuse was first brought to her attention in 2016. This was investigated and no evidence found. 

Related ArticlesSA teens facing depression crisisSome women feel grief after an abortion, but there’s no evidence of serious mental health issuesThe alleged victim and perpetrator were both residents. 

When sexual abuse was reported again, an inquiry did find evidence but the perpetrator could not be determined. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

On the third occasion, there was no evidence but the residents were moved to separate cottages.“When there is such an allegation, we first investigate internally, and we ask the family for consent to take the person to a doctor for a check-up. 

At times, it is the family who go to the police,” said Harie.

In all instances, the family of the alleged victims had been contacted. This procedure was followed again when a new allegation was reported to Harie yesterday morning.

“We contacted the family who consented to the person being taken for a medical check-up and that is happening as we speak.” 

Keeka believes CCTV would make it easier for evidence 
to be collected and for the 
“ongoings” at the facility to 
be observed.

“The DA has suggested to management that this be urgently resolved so that movements within the facility - both staff and patients’ - can be monitored properly,” he said.

He commended the “proactive stance taken by management and “will allow the process to unfold while we continue to monitor matters”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The DA calls on the management of the facility to remain transparent in terms of what has or has not happened. 

“In the event that we do not believe that this is the case, we will not hesitate to intervene on behalf of the patients of this facility.”

Regarding the claims of exploitation, Harie said the work done at the facility was part of the economic integration of the people they housed and was part of life skills and skills training. 

She said where there has been any claim of ill treatment, the organisation had attended to it immediately. 

“Last year, for example, there was an incident of assault which was investigated and the staff member underwent disciplinary action and was dismissed.

“There is no rampant ill-treatment and abuse as is the perception being created. These are isolated incidents that are being brought to the fore to create the impression that this is a daily occurrence.”

She assured the families of people at the organisation’s homes that care and protection of their loved ones was a priority. 
The Mercury