Durban - Spotting a young girl looking frightened and lost on a busy Joburg street, Wits University student Cebile Natasha Lekhuleni’s training from a mentor programme kicked in and she decided to help.
The 24-year-old said on Wednesday that she had just returned from a trip home from Mpumalanga and was walking from Park Station to Wits campus when she saw the young child, 10, talking to a man on Rissik Street.

Lekhuleni said the child was being questioned by the man and looked “extremely scared”.

“He was asking her why she was alone and where is her mom, and I thought I should take her with me to school for safety,” she said.

Lekhuleni said the child, who was carrying a lime-green-and-black bag, told her she was a Grade 3 pupil from Winterton in KwaZulu-Natal.

Upon further questioning, Lekhuleni discovered that the child had taken a taxi from KZN to Joburg to visit her mother.

“I asked if she knew where her mom lived and she said no, she had been told to look for a red building after getting off the taxi,” said Lekhuleni.

With no contact details for her family, the child agreed to go with Lekhuleni to Solomon Mahlangu house at Wits.

Lekhuleni said she initially called 10111, but after waiting a while campus security escorted both her and the child to Hillbrow police station.

The Wits student, who is doing her Masters in Microbiology and Biotechnology, said she decided to post the incident on Facebook in an attempt to get help. 

“I was not really campaigning (to find the child’s family), but I think the post went viral to an extent where the KZN community got involved in finding the girl’s house,”she said.

The post got a reaction from more than 6000 people and was shared 8562 times on Facebook, eventually alerting the child’s family in KZN to the situation.

“A lot of community members sent me useful numbers to call, and some went to the extent of texting their friends asking about the child and her family members, and eventually it reached her family in KZN,” said Lekhuleni.

Through a Facebook contact, Lekhuleni got the numbers of the child’s mother and aunt.

Lekhuleni said the aunt sent her a message to thank her: “Sister we thank you so much for what you did, may God bless and be with you.”

Gauteng police spokesperson, Captain Mavela Masondo, confirmed that the child had been reunited with her 
mother.

He said the mother had gone looking for the child at local police stations, and eventually found her at Hillbrow police station that night.

“The police are investigating whether there was any child negligence from the side of the family. The child is safe with the mother and grandmother in Joburg,” said Masondo.

Lekhuleni, who was pleased that the child had found her family, said: “As a learner and mentor at Wits’s Targeting Talent Programme, helping out and showing Ubuntu is part of our code,” she said.

The Mercury could not reach the child’s family.
Twitter praised Cebile for her actions:

 




 



The Mercury