Durban - Children in Chatsworth and surrounding areas have a trusted friend in times of need thanks to Child Welfare Chatsworth, which reaches out with life skills programmes and intervenes in cases of alleged child abuse in the community.
Child Welfare Chatsworth president Logan Naidu said the NGO helped some 5000 children every year with services ranging from prevention programmes in schools to teach and warn children how to protect themselves against predators, drugs and bullies, to intervention and court assistance in support of victims of child abuse. 
The organisation is volunteer-driven and its programmes aim to create a safe environment and to promote the mobilisation of the community to effectively protect children.
It also provides counselling and support for children who have been abused and neglected; distributes food hampers and clothing to the poor and takes time to visit child-headed households and foster homes to check up on their living conditions.
Naidu said that being invited to benefit from hosting guests in one of the charity marquees at the eLAN Gold Cup was a valuable opportunity that would assist the organisation to fund its services.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He said the organisation’s ticket sales for the race day were well- supported and were sold out in the weeks building up to the event. 
Guests can expect to receive some racing tokens and to enjoy tea and a full menu from 11am to 8pm, as well as live entertainment and the opportunity to participate in a fund-raising raffle of donated goods.
“We are completely sold out; it is mostly business that supports us for the Gold Cup,” he said. 
Naidu said the organisation was active in local schools where teams presented child protection programmes to both children and educators.
“We have programmes on the dangers of exposing themselves to strangers, peer pressure, drug abuse and on the telltale signs of emotional and sexual abuse,” he said. 
Naidu said the organisation also ran an HIV/Aids programme and had a database of needy children who had been going to school without any lunch and for whom it regularly provided sandwiches.
“We really appreciate the community support that we get,” he said. 
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads