Durban - KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Sihle Zikalala, on Thursday announced the new Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife board.
Zikalala retained five former members - Bonginkosi Mthembu, Thulisa Ndlela, Vusi Mvelase, Sipho Mtolo and Seeng Lebenya. 

He also appointed Thandeka Ntshangase, Ian Wing, Sihle Ndlovu, Robert Haswell, Diana Hoorzuk and Sinegugu Ncube. 

They will serve for a period of three years.

Zikalala said  the new board comprised trusted members 
of society.

The board, which has been approved by the provincial cabinet, is chaired by Dr William Mngoma, who worked for the provincial Department of Environmental Affairs for many years and rose through the ranks until he became general manager, responsible for biodiversity management, before he retired last year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“These are people who are bringing to this strategic organisation a wealth of combined technical and administrative skills and ex-
periences, hence we are 
confident that they will hit 
the ground running, especially in dealing decisively with 
all the challenges that Ezem­velo KZN Wildlife faces,” Zika­lala said.

“We want the board to ensure that we continue to protect our environment and biodiversity capital by employing strategies that will, among other things, curtail rhino poaching. 

“More importantly, we are expecting that they will influence turnaround strategies that will guarantee effective utilisation of the organisation’s assets for the generation of sustainable income.”

He said board members had been appointed through a transparent, credible and ­legally sound process.

“We know that there are always attempts by certain ­political parties to try and politicise the process of appointing the Ezemvelo board with the sole purpose of scoring cheap political points. 

“While this behaviour helps political parties, it unfortunately has a negative impact on staff morale, and the general health of the organisation. 

“We therefore call for the end of politicising administrative processes at Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife,” Zikalala said.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury