Durban - Barely a handful of taxi drivers turned up for a march in the Durban CBD on Wednesday. 

The march, planned by rights group Qina Mshayeli was expected to be attended by drivers from around KwaZulu-Natal. 

By the time they reached the Durban City Hall, there were less than 10 marchers  holding a banner reading; "we can't live a life of slavery in a free country."
Related ArticlesInspired journey from taxi drivers to bus owners
Among their demands is a 35% decrease in the petrol price and for the scrapping of the Aarto system. 

The president of Qina Mshayeli/Qina Msebenzi, Clement Doncabe, said drivers were marching because they were tired of their grievances raised with the government falling on deaf ears.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“There are various issues that are hitting the taxi industry hard. The government is just implementing things like the petrol price increase without considering this industry - which transports 70% of the population,” Doncabe said.

He added that the industry bore the brunt of the “frequent” petrol price increases, and passing this on to commuters, by increasing fares, left them in a precarious position.

Doncabe said the protestors’ memorandum also raised concerns about the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act, which provides for a demerit points system to penalise drivers and operators who are habitual ­offenders.

“They are still discussing it in Parliament, but this government does what it likes so we know it will go through. The point system will hit us hard,” Doncabe said.

“They do not even consider that we are forced to commit traffic transgressions. We are expected to return a certain amount of money every day after filling the taxis with ­expensive petrol.

“The only way we can do that is to make sure we are fast. Their laws are just not conducive to our operations,” Don­cabe said.

Department of Transport, Community Safety and Liaison spokesperson Mluleki Mntungwa said the department constantly engaged with the industry through formal structures, but the issues protesters were raising had not been brought to its attention.

Regarding a call on the memorandum for the government to do more about taxi violence, Mntungwa said the department and MEC Mxolisi Kaunda had intervened.

“In all areas where there have been challenges emanating from violent conduct in the taxi industry, we have been at the forefront of peacemaking, and will continue to do so.

“There have been volatile areas such as Nongoma, Lady­smith and KwaDukuza, for example, which are now stable through our intervention, working with Santaco (South African National Taxi Council),” he said.
Although the march was small, police maintained a heavy presence.

The Mercury