Durban - A police detective, the State alleges, was one of the kingpins in a syndicate that not only extorted money from residents but also ordered and carried out killings in Durban’s notorious Glebelands hostel.
This is according to an ­indictment served on eight ­accused, charged with a range of crimes, who appeared in the Durban Regional Court on Friday.

The hostel has been beset by killings, some of which are believed to be politically motivated, and was the subject of an investigation by the Moerane Commission of Inquiry into political violence.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Violence monitors who have worked at the hostel believe that more than 100 people have been killed there over the past few years.

The indictment alleges that prior to the commission of the crimes, detective constable Bhekukwazi Mdweshu, 37, and his co-accused had conspired to form a syndicate “with the common purpose to eliminate” their rivals at the hostel.

These rivals had, according to the indictment, threatened the accuseds’ control of the hostel and their control of the payments made by residents.

The other accused are Khayelihle Mbu­thuma, 28, Vukani Mcombothi, 30, Eugene Hlophe, 45, Ncomekile Ntshangase, 34, Mbuyiselwa Mkhize, 29, Mondli Mthethwa, 29, and Bongani Mbhele, 33.

“From time to time the accused and other persons known or unknown to the State would summon other residents in the Glebelands Hostel complex, to meetings to announce that a collection of money was being made. 

“Residents were ordered to make payment of cash to the accused or to persons known or unknown to the State under threat of reprisal if such payments were not forthcoming,” reads the indictment.

The State alleges that at the said meetings, some of the ­accused carried rifles and handguns that they used to ­intimidate residents into making the payments.

Between August 2014 and March 2016 the eight accused, either acting individually or as a group, are said to have conducted a reign of terror at the hostel, and were allegedly responsible for the killings of nine people during this period, while there were also allegedly attempts to murder others.

Mdweshu is facing charges of managing an enterprise conducted through a pattern of racketeering activities. Other charges against him and the other accused include murder, attempted murder and conspiracy to commit murder.

The accused are all in cus­tody pending trial. 

They are set to stand trial in the Pietermaritzburg High Court as State prosecutor ­advocate Dorian Paver confirmed on Friday that a certificate for the matter to be heard in the high court had been granted by the office of the National Director of Public Prosecutions.

The matter has been set down for September 3.

The indictment recounts how various victims were “shot in the head”. 

In one of the more brazen murders, the accused allegedly killed Glebelands resident Sipho Ndovela on May18, 2015, outside the uMlazi Magistrate’s Court precinct.

Ndovela was a witness to the killing of another hostel resident, Fikile Siyephu, in February 2015.

The State has submitted a witness list of 107 people, including police officers, a cellular network provider and private security companies.