Durban - The pupils from a snake-infested, dilapidated Dundee school have started the third term in new premises.
Dundee Junior Secondary School, which was mainly prefabricated classrooms installed decades ago, now stands empty, ready for demolition before construction of a new building starts by November. 
Education Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the almost 900 pupils were moved to the department’s Endumeni District offices. 
“They were provided 21 new mobile classrooms on the premises, which have 18 toilets and nine offices for the principal and staff,” he said. 
Related ArticlesGirl in hospital after encounter with spitting cobra at troubled Dundee school
The prefabricated classrooms at the old school had been beset with infrastructure problems including gaping holes and falling debris. In one incident, a snake spat on a pupil’s face.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Another child had been hospitalised when a pole holding up his classroom’s veranda fell, knocking him on the head.
The parents protested and pulled their children out of the school, demanding that classes be held at the district offices until a permanent structure could be built. 
Mzwakhe Sithebe, convener of the Endumeni Civic Association which had taken up the matter, said after the last incident, the department had supplied other prefabricated material. However, these were never put up as they were worse than what was already there. 
“It should not have taken parents protesting and closing the school for the department to act. This really shows that there is a gap between the people in government positions and those they are meant to serve,” said Sithebe. 
The department had said the school was already on a list of schools to be prioritised for refurbishment in the current financial year. 
Mahlambi said moving the children was not the department succumbing to pressure from the parents, but rather doing what was best for the children as speedily as they could, considering the processes they needed to comply with. 
“They suggested it and we listened. It didn’t take long for us to decide on a plan, but we could not move the children without infrastructure. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“These are our children, we have their best interests at heart. That is why we have allowed for the temporary use of our district offices - it’s unheard of for schoolchildren to share premises with department officials. 
“But it was done because we are prioritising them,” he said. 
Keys
Mahlambi said the Department of Public Works was awaiting handover of the keys of the old school to start work. 
The keys could be handed over as soon as next week, when all the school’s property had been moved, said school governing body (SGB) chairperson Gift Gaysman. 
He said at their last meeting with department officials, they were told construction was likely to start by November with a new school to be finished in two to three years. 
“There has been a complete turnaround, we were even kindly offered trucks to move the desks to the new premises where the children have safe classrooms, ample space to play and are closer to their homes. We were even given timelines and when to expect what,” said Gaysman. 
He said the progress was a huge relief as it would also diffuse any tension between them and parents who believed the SGB was not doing enough. 
“We tried and tried, because at the end of the day we were also focused on the children and their safety.”
Parent Candy Phillips said parents had banded together to get buses to transport children from other areas. “I can’t tell you the peace of mind we have knowing our children are in a safe school.”
The Mercury