Durban - The city’s executive committee (exco) has given the green light to the municipality’s controversial plan to build social housing on some of the city’s prime sites.
At least eight sites have been identified for social housing developments - residential blocks which cater for middle-income earners who are considered to be earning too much to qualify for an RDP house, but too little to qualify for a housing bond.
According to the report presented at exco yesterday, these sites, mainly open spaces, were deemed prone to land invasions.
“The members (of the human settlements committee) were advised that due to ongoing concerns raised by community members that most open spaces around eThekwini were being invaded, it was apparent it would be in the best interest for council to secure the land in question for housing development,” reads the report.
Speaking during the exco meeting on Tuesday, ANC councillor Mondli Mthembu said building social housing in these sites would contribute to the regeneration of the CBD, despite concerns to the contrary.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We have said we are facing capital flight with people moving to the northern and western suburbs. There is high disinvestment in the buildings within the city and that leads to the illegal occupation of buildings. So this seeks to regenerate the city line.”
Mthembu said the council wanted to bring back investment into the inner city. 
Beryl Mphakathi, deputy city manager responsible for human settlements, said the reality was there were many people already living in the inner city and it was up to the city to make it formal. 
She said about 60000 to 70000 people were currently living in the inner city, adding that this number was expected to reach 450000 by 2040.
Mphakathi said that around the world, thriving cities were those that were inclusive and had mixed and integrated communities.
“We want to avoid the gentrification phenomenon. We are part of the conversations happening at Sea Point, we are assisting the City of Cape Town to deal with gentrification, where people of middle income cannot access the city from a residential point of view,” she said.
The plan was approved by exco, with only the DA members objecting, saying there was no need to rush the plan and that more site visits were needed. 
Speaker Lekgoa Mapena said an intensive site visit had been done and there would be no need to rezone some of the areas as they were already zoned as residential.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He implied that the DA was opposed to the plan because the party was against having “low- class” people in the CBD. 
The DA’s Heinz de Boer denied this.
“The DA is not opposed to social housing, no matter where it is at,” he said.
De Boer argued that some of the sites could be harnessed for other economic opportunities that would better suit the city. 
“Some areas are more suitable for a commercial hotel or something than they are for residential. We are saying let us all go and take a look,” he said.
DA caucus leader Nicole Graham shared similar sentiments. 
“It is not about low-class people, as councillor Mapena puts it. It is about protecting the city’s economic assets, protecting the city’s rates base and taking suitable decisions for suitable sites,” she said.
She used the example of the Star Seaside Children’s Home site, which she said could be worth R50 million. 
The IFP’s Mdu Nkosi said all departments were present when a tour of the sites was done.
“I don’t know why we need to go back as this council,” he said.
Professor Ashwin Desai of the Department of Sociology at the University of Johannesburg said that while institutional apartheid had fallen, geographical apartheid remained and therefore any attempts to break it were welcome.
“Those who are opposed to this are suffering from the ‘Nimby’ (not in my backyard) phenomenon, in that they want change everywhere else in society as long as it does not affect them. I hope the city does not kowtow to those,” he said.
Desai said such a move would contribute to building a truly non-racial society where people interacted, even socially. 
He said there was also an economic factor in that most of the people who worked in city centres tended to live the furthest from the cities and ended up spending up to 60% of their salaries on transport.

Targeted sites 
* Corner of Playfair and Molyneux roads (Star Seaside Children’s Home).
* Lot 3405 and 3406 on 2Epsom Road (Table Tennis Association building).
* Umgeni Road, south of Isaiah Ntshangase Road and east of Umgeni Road.
* Drive-in site, south of Sandile Thusi Road, west of Sylvester Ntuli.
* Albert Park, north of Margaret Mncadi Avenue and south of Diakonia Avenue.
* Victoria Park, north of Baumann Road and south of Gresham Place.
* Warwick Bus Depot - Ismail C Meer Street and east of Market Road.
* Block AK, west of Gladys Manzi Road, south of Osborne Street and north of Ascot Road.
The Mercury