Durban - The eThekwini Municipality has urged residents to register to get their rates and electricity bills online, as the post office strike continues for a third week.
Deputy head of customer services Khanyi Gama said in a statement on Tuesday that the municipality had difficulty getting bills to customers due to the ongoing strike at the SA Post Office (Sapo).
“We utilise the post office to get our bills to our customers. We acknowledge that customers have not received their monthly bill and we urge them to register on e-Services as it is fast, efficient, paperless and convenient. 
“Customers can contact the municipality if they require a copy of their bill,” Gama said. Nobuhle Njapha from Sapo apologised for any inconvenience caused by the non- or late delivery of bills as a result of the industrial action.
She said unprocessed mail had accumulated in sorting centres and would take roughly 20 work days to process.
Meanwhile, the post office had since revised its wage increase offer of 6% to 6.5%, backdated to April 1, and agreed to employ 500 part-time workers permanently, said Communication Workers Union (CWU) provincial secretary Thami Mzileni.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He said the post office had also agreed to allow a task team to work on how to convert the remaining 2200 workers to permanent employees, but in the meantime their working hours would be increased to 6½ hours instead of four a day. 
Speaking to The Mercury after taking the new offer to workers in KwaZulu-Natal, Mzileni said they would engage at a national level and then take the workers’ mandate back to the post office. 
The union said it still wanted an 8% wage increase. The strike also affects Telkom workers.
The municipality said residents could register for e-Services at https://eservices.durban.gov.za/v2/. The portal allows the updating of account information and delivery of accounts to linked e-mail addresses. For queries: http://correspondence.durban.gov.za:200/.
The Mercury