Durban - Residents under the Umuziwabantu local municipality on the South Coast are facing severe water restrictions as the area buckles under the strain of water shortages.
The Ugu District Municipality portfolio committee of water and sanitation and exco committee has proposed that the area be declared a disaster area to trigger an intervention by the provincial government.
Ugu District Municipality is responsible for the supply of water to the Umuziwabantu in Harding.
During an oversight in- spection by the DA, the party said it had found that Harding Dam is at 15% capacity and the Weza River, another key water source, is at an all-time low. 
DA MPL Dr Rishigen Viranna said they welcomed the decision to declare Umuziwabantu a disaster area and wanted more to be done to assist people in that area. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“Despite clear evidence of an impending crisis, no not- able action has been taken to conscientise communities of the impending crisis and possible implementation of water restrictions,” said Viranna. 
He said the DA had demanded that more action be taken to avert the crisis.
“During the intervening period, the water situation in Harding Dam has significantly worsened, rendering this vital water source functionally empty. A taxing regime of water restrictions is becoming increasingly likely with each passing day for residents in both the municipality’s rural and urban hinterlands,” he said. 
Institute
By declaring a disaster, the municipality would institute disaster management procedures set out in the Disaster Management Act and roll out a water restriction schedule to save water, Viranna said.
Spokesperson for the Ugu District Municipality France Zama said that declaring a disaster area would allow for provincial and national government intervention. 
Zama said the situation was very difficult. “The areas under the Umuziwabantu Municipality are among the hardest hit by drought. The water source that we used to supply the area, the river, has dried up and we have no other water source in that area.
“Many parts are already being serviced by water tankers that have to collect the water about 120km away, but they are not enough, and we are hoping that with the intervention of the provincial government we could get more tankers,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We have diverted a ‘line of water’ from another area to Umuziwabantu but that area (where we are diverting the water from) is now taking strain,” Zama added.
The municipality was looking at imposing water restrictions although it was not certain at this stage what those would entail, and they were busy engaging stakeholders.
“We have met with traditional leaders to brief them on the situation and we will also be meeting with business people, as they are our largest consumers,” Zama said. 
The Mercury