Durban - The Jozini municipal manager is facing damning allegations related to questionable transactions.
John Khumalo was placed on suspension by a unanimous “vote” of the full five party council on Monday following a recommendation from the Municipal Public Accounts Committee. 
The committee had advised the council to investigate several financial transactions overseen by Khumalo.
These include spending R11million to construct the 1km Mkuze road - originally R6.5m had been budgeted but the amount ballooned. 
It alleged Khumalo paid R8m to a company appointed to renovate council offices and the council chamber. The money was paid before any work was done.
The contractor allegedly owed Sars money and Sars took the money meant for the project. Work meant to be completed within six months has dragged on for more than two years as the contractor has no money.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The council also wants an investigation into allegations that they are billed R1m a month by a travel agency. 
Council speaker Lindiwe Gumbi said the council had placed Khumalo on suspension to ensure the investigation could be conducted without interference.
She said they were concerned with the renovations to the council chamber. “We hold our council meeting in guest houses because we do not have a council chamber.
“Many councillors are also upset that they have not been able to implement their poverty alleviation projects and are being insulted by the community members who accuse them of not delivering. 
“They have not received the money for these projects, only 30% of the councillors have.
“The municipal manager never said we had financial challenges, but the CFO who is now acting municipal manager has said we have overspent by around R20 million,” she said.
Approached for comment, Khumalo said: “I can confirm I have been suspended but I cannot speak much further than that as I am already suspended and I am waiting for the charges. Some of the allegations made are not true," he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury