Durban - The Comrades Marathon Association (CMA) is saddened by news of the death of long-serving Comrades volunteer, Sadie van Dyk. She was 87 years old.
Sadie worked at the Comrades registration facility in Durban for nearly 23 years. She was affectionately known as Granny to those who knew her. She has been described as a mother figure at the registration venue who was ever willing to lend a helping hand.

The CMA registration convener in Durban, Nathi Mncube, said Van Dyk was an inspiring, kind and hard-working person who was a welcoming sight at the registration facility. Mncube said: “The runners looked forward to seeing ‘Granny’ on an annual basis. She helped the athletes and was patient and helpful to everyone who worked with her. We will miss her very much.”

Fellow registration volunteer Dorothy Gronbeck said: “Sadie always had a smile on her face. She was adept with the new technology and processes the Comrades registration implemented on a regular basis. She was never shy to learn and constantly worked on improving her knowledge. Sadie was creative with her work and had a good sense of humour.”

Former co-convener of Durban registration, Erica Neff, said: “The runners always looked forward to seeing Sadie’s smiling face and she was a one-of-a-kind human being. She helped the volunteers wherever she could.”

CMA chairperson, Cheryl Winn, said: “We are saddened by Sadie’s passing. From everything we have heard about this wonderful lady, it is clear that she was incredibly well-liked and looked forward to being part of the registration at the Comrades Expo.”

CMA vice-chairperson Sifiso Nzuza said: “Sadie willingly gave her time and energy to help make the Comrades experience that much more special for runners. On behalf of everyone at the Comrades Marathon Association, we send our deepest sympathies to her friends and family.”

The memorial service for Sadie will be held at 5pm at the Westville Athletics Club, 123 Maryvale Road, Westville on Thursday.
The Mercury