Durban - Police are investigating a police officer photographed allegedly passed out drunk at a Durban mall recently.
In the photographs, posted on social media, the officer is pictured in full uniform, with his firearm holstered, seemingly sleeping on the ground, oblivious that his photo was being taken. 
“According to witnesses, the member reeked of alcohol and was clearly under the influence of alcohol. To make matters worse, this policeman had worked a nightshift the morning he was found,” read the post.
Many of the hundreds of people who commented on the post condemned the officer, but some questioned whether he might have fainted or was merely sleeping. 
However, police spokesperson Brigadier Jay Naicker said it was not yet clear what occurred, but several prohibitions are imposed on police officers in uniform - whether on- or off-duty - including buying or consuming alcohol, or sleeping in a public area. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Naicker said the incident occurred on Thursday, when the officer was off-duty. The matter had the attention of the Outer West cluster commander, Major-General James Sayer, as the officer is reportedly stationed at Westville Police Station.
“The cluster commander is personally investigating this matter with a view to institute an internal department investigation,” said Naicker. 
Mall management had been contacted for assistance. “The acting provincial commissioner (Lieutenant-General Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi) is following the investigation as we view such misconduct by our officers in a very serious light,” he said. 
The Pavilion management confirmed the incident, saying the officer was found in the parking lot at about 1pm. “Swift action was taken by Pavilion security to remove the officer from the premises in accordance with the rights of admission observed by the centre. 
“Thereafter the Westville SAPS took the officer into their custody,” the mall said. 
Dianne Kohler Barnard, the DA’s deputy spokesperson on police, said she had forwarded the post to Ipid for investigation. 
“Appearances seem to show he (police officer) was passed out, but one cannot discount that he may have had some or other illness. But it’s shocking, and not a picture SAPS can be proud of. It’s of special concern because his firearm was on him. Anyone could have taken it; it could still have happened after the photograph was taken.”
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads