Durban - A project, aimed at providing a better transport service to Durban residents, has been lauded by members of the eThekwini Municipality’s executive unit. 

Recently, during an exco meeting, it was noted that the project undertaken by the city’s transport authority, will see engagement with minibus taxi operators, who are seen as key providers of transport in Durban. 

City acting spokesperson, Mandla Nsele said the Incentive Programme, for which participation is voluntarily, has the overall objective of empowering the industry at all levels, providing better levels of service and safety to commuters, developing the industry towards a more formal and scheduled service structure and improving the standard of public transport in the city.

“The tabled report, which outlined progress made in the programme, noted that the industry will be instrumental in rolling out the new Integrated Public Transport Network within the city,” he said. 

Nsele said the Programme was officially launched to mini bus taxi operators and the public in October 2017. 

“A pilot of 500 vehicles was agreed to be initiated to test the Programme and iron out teething problems before rolling out to the industry at a larger scale. In preparation for the pilot, additional consultations were required at an association level within the industry. During this consolation phase a few of the assumptions that were made with the original submission have been revisited and some additional functions have been identified that will be required in order to ensure the effectiveness and success of the programme. The cost for these activities were not factored into the original submission to council,” he said. 

The report states that additional funding is required for some of these additional functions which have been identified and are critical for the effectiveness and success of the Programme.

The report grants authority to city manager, Sipho Nzuza, on behalf of eThekwini Municipality to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the non-profit organisation established under the Economic Development Unit, for the pilot phase of the 500 vehicles under the Programme.

Mandla said authority was further granted for a new NPO to be established for the full roll-out of the programme and for Nzuza to enter a memorandum of agreement with the new NPO as well as it being recorded that the contract will be legally binding between the Municipality and the NPO’s and sets in place the terms and conditions of the agreement and the methodology of the contracting and payment.

“Furthermore, the municipality’s Vehicle Monitoring System and equipment as part of this Programme and the authority to install vehicle tracking systems onto the taxi owners’ vehicles for the pilot phase. Council also approved the additional budget from the originally approved budget of R131 million to R202 million to cater for the Programme set-up and management, Skills Development Programme, vehicles set up, driver induction and training, vehicle decals, marketing and communication, vehicle tracking units, tracker data, incentives for drivers, value added tax and contingency,” Nsele said. 

The report notes that R1 million will be provided in the 2018/19 adjustment budget with the balance being provided in the Adjustment Budget.
The Mercury