Durban - Should the city’s official colour be DA blue or ANC yellow? That is what seemed to occupy the minds of some eThekwini councillors, as they debated the city’s R2.3million rebranding exercise in exco this week.
The DA first accused the ANC of only rebranding so that everything matches its own colours but the ANC would have none of it, claiming that the DA was opposed to any rebranding as it wanted to ensure that its traditional colour blue remains the city’s official colour.
“Much of the branding is done using ANC colours. Are we branding ourselves as a city because there is a need to do so or are we rebranding because there is a need to give some political parties colourful platforms? I think this is a plan to politicise everything,” said DA caucus leader Nicole Graham.
ANC chief whip Nelly Nyanisa took offence, saying Graham had ulterior motives for opposing the rebranding. 
“She wants to keep the blue of the DA in the branding that is currently being used, so she starts picking on colours. If you can go to our people they enjoy the changes they see with this democracy.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Barbara Fortein reminded Graham that the project had already been approved last year and what was before exco was only a progress report.
Deputy city manager Phillip Sithole explained that the process was not just about the logo.
“It’s about the definition of who we are,” he said. Sithole said other cities had undergone similar exercises and said no metropolitan in the country spent as little as eThekwini would be spending.
Mayor Zandile Gumede echoed these sentiments, saying branding was not only about a logo. “All we are trying to do is to consolidate and have one image as a city,” she said.
In a veiled swipe at the DA, she said: “If you watch the TV you will see that once a particular party takes over, everything will be in their colour but nobody says anything.”
The progress report for the rebranding project stated that the city manager had since appointed a project team, led by the deputy city manager of governance, Sipho Cele, to embark on a process to review municipal branding.
The report notes that the rebranding exercise is scheduled to take place over six months, with implementation of the new brand taking place over three years. 
As part of intensive stakeholder engagement and to help evaluate public input, the task team will set up two focus groups. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The first group will comprise city officials, religious leaders and business people. The second group will consist of members of the executive committee and councillors from the Governance and Human Resources committee. The political focus group, the report states, will also serve as an oversight committee. 
The external consultation process will see the project team interact with Brand South Africa, hold focus group discussions with the Durban Chamber of Commerce, Durban Business Coalition, Minara Chamber, youth formations, non-profit organisations, non-governmental organisations, amakhosi and other relevant groups. 
The Mercury