Durban - Residents living in northern and southern parts of the city were left with rubbish on the pavements following a disruption in dirt collection services on Thursday. According eThekwini's acting head of communications, Mandla Nsele, dirt collection services from the city's cleaning and solid waste were not able to pick up dirt from uMhlanga, Ottawa and Verulam due to disruptions with service. 
"The disruptions stem from deadlock negotiations between Expanded Public Works Programme employees and the council. Negotiations by DSW senior management are underway which have led to services resuming in the uThongathi area. Services resumed at midday on Thursday and workers will be working to ensure that the backlog is cleared," he said. 
Nsele said the city has been working to resolve the situation. 
Related ArticlesDurban mayor apologises for DSW pick up delaysDisgruntled contractors dump refuse on M4 in protestCity's DSW saga turns uglyDSW refuse collection woes continueDSW runs out of fundsDurban mayor apologises for DSW pick up delaysDisgruntled contractors dump refuse on M4 in protestCity's DSW saga turns uglyDSW refuse collection woes continue123"Residents will be notified accordingly, when collection in uMhlanga and Verulam resumes," he said. 
Nsele added that they were aware of drivers being forced to offload dirt on the road in Folweni, west of Durban, on Wednesday. 
"The drivers were stopped by members of an unknown business forum who forced them to dump refuse on the road. Although services were interrupted, contingency plans have been put in place to continue with the removal of the refuse in the area. Police officers from both SAPS and Metro Police have been sent to the area to accompany DSW vehicles,"Nsele said.
DSW has apologised for the interruptions and will further investigate the matter.
Nsele urged residents to keep all refuse within their property boundaries to avoid litter from spreading all over. 
"Residents will be informed when refuse collection resumes. We would like to apologise for the inconvenience caused to residents by the non-collection of refuse," he said. 

The Mercury