Durban - A sports agency which represents players and coaches in the Premier Soccer League has pleaded guilty to fixing the price of commission fees and trading conditions.
In terms of an agreement reached with the Competition Commission, Quality Talent Sports (QTS) agreed to pay a fine of R114168.84, it said. 

The commission said on Tuesday that the consent agreement had been referred to the Competition Tribunal for confirmation.

It said QTS, along with the SA Football Intermediaries Association (Safia) and 
its other 35 members, had been under investigation since last year. 

The commission said they were all referred to the tri-
bunal for prosecution in September after it uncovered collusion among them when negotiating transfer fees and contracts for football players and coaches.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The commission alleged that the investigation revealed:

 Safia and its members agreed to charge soccer players and coaches a standard 10% commission fee when negotiating transfer fees and contracts on their behalf;

 They charge football players a standard 20% commission fee when negotiating commercial contracts; and

 They use Safia as a platform for collusion.

The commission said that in the settlement agreement with QTS, the agency had undertaken to co-operate fully 
in the prosecution of the other accused companies, which included testifying before the 
tribunal and providing evidence. 

The sports agency has also agreed to attend a competition law compliance training programme and to make the training materials available to all employees, managers, directors and agents annually, to ensure they comply with the Competition Act. 

Tembinkosi Bonakele, the competition commissioner, said: “It’s encouraging to see someone who owns up and undertakes to assist the investigation and prosecution. 

RemorseAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“In turn, QTS has been able to negotiate a palatable settlement that takes account of the fact that they have shown remorse and regret their unlawful actions.”

Bonakele said although the matter against Safia and the other accused companies was currently being prosecuted in the tribunal, the commission was open to negotiations.

The commission said the investigation into the allegations of anti-competitive behaviour started after Safia and its members laid a complaint with the commission, accusing the SA Football Association (Safa) of price fixing.

In May 2015, Safa, acting on instructions of Fifa, had sought to regulate the affairs of football agents, including to reduce the 10% commission to 3%. Safia blocked this. 

It said that in July 2015, Safia filed a complaint with the commission against Safa  alleging the 3% cap introduced by Safa constituted fixing of an agent’s fee, in contravention of the Competition Act.

However, while looking into the matter, the commission obtained evidence that Safia and its members may have engaged in collusive conduct by fixing the commission they charge football players and coaches.

Approached for comment yesterday, a representative of one of the companies named in the report said QTS should tell the commission who they colluded with.

“To be honest I am not sure why they (commission releasing the statement)  did that, (it was) maybe to influence others to do the same. 

“I am talking on behalf of myself and I can say I have never colluded my entire life; in actual fact we do not charge a fixed price for the work that we do, everything is based on negotiations.” 

Tebogo Monyai, the vice-president of the SA Football Players Union, said they welcomed the progress made in the matter.

He said it was a difficult issue to prove but he hoped that it would help to ensure that players were not cheated. 

“Some of these companies do as they like. For instance, it is illegal to charge more than 10% and it is illegal to take money from both the club and the player from the same negotiations,” he said.  

Several attempts, including phone calls and text messages, to reach QTS for comment were unsuccessful.

Attempts to contact Safia were also unsuccessful. 
The Mercury