Police Minister Bheki Cele and Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) head Robert McBride have until Tuesday to reinstate one of the senior investigators suspended by the cops’ watchdog.
The pair have been threatened with legal action if Cedrick Nkabinde is not reinstated to his post or transferred to the SAPS under the Protection of Disclosure Act.
Attorney Garry Bell confirmed on Sunday that his law firm had served Cele and McBride with a letter of demand. “We've written a letter to the minister and the executive director of Ipid regarding the suspension,” Bell said.
He would not comment further, saying he would only do so after consulting Nkabinde based on the responses from Cele and McBride.
The letter of demand comes after Nkabinde lodged a complaint with Cele over McBride’s alleged unethical conduct in the investigation of former acting commissioners Khomotso Phahlane and Lesetja Mothiba, and the incumbent Khehla Sitole.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The minister has since asked Parliament to look into the allegations.
In the letter, seen by Independent Media, the lawyers said Nkabinde became aware of unlawful activities in the investigation of high-ranking SAPS officers between November 2016 and April this year.
“Our client reported this to the minister of police on April 8, 2018,” the letter reads.
Nkabinde was a member of the task team but he was removed when allegations against him surfaced.
The letter also details the fallout between McBride and Nkabinde after Nkabinde lodged a grievance in the appointment of a Ms Botha to a deputy director post at Ipid.
This grew further over differences in the handling of an investigation into allegations that some Ipid investigators were offered SAPS positions in return for implicating McBride in wrongdoing.
In one letter to Cele and Parliament, Nkabinde demanded that his suspension be withdrawn and that he be transferred to the SAPS.
Ipid’s spokesperson Moses Dlamini said they would not comment on the matter.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads