Durban - Four men who were wanted for robberies and murders in two provinces have been nabbed by KwaZulu-Natal police following a two-day operation.
Acting on information, the KwaMsane Tactical Response Team members started the search at Ezibayeni, Hluhluwe and Nongoma in northern KZN. 
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said yesterday the operation started in the early hours of Friday when they spotted a blue Toyota Tazz in Mthekwini, Hluhluwe. 

Related ArticlesWomen assaulted in Toti robbery“They tried to intercept the vehicle but it sped off,” she said. A shootout erupted and one of the suspects was injured. 
He was taken to hospital under police guard and another suspect was arrested. 
Two others fled into the bushes on foot, said Gwala. 
“The team worked tirelessly until late last night searching for the two suspects. They were traced and arrested in the Nongoma area while trying to flee to Gauteng,” she said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Police found a firearm with 11 rounds of ammunition, and preliminary investigations revealed that the firearm was stolen in a 2014 robbery in Gauteng and the Tazz was stolen in Hluhluwe this month. 
“Two suspects are also linked to robberies, murders and attempted murder cases committed in Gauteng and Ezibayeni. They will also be profiled to check if they are linked to other cases reported in Zululand and surrounding areas,” she said.
The men, aged between 20 and 28, are expected to appear in the Hluhluwe Magistrate’s Court tomorrow, facing charges of possession of an unlicensed firearm and ammunition, possession of suspected stolen property and attempted murder of police officials.
Meanwhile, over the past week, police have seized four unlicensed firearms and 62 stolen fridges in various operations around the province.
Durban Central police arrested a person found with an unlicensed firearm and ammunition as well as counterfeit R100 notes in Brickhill Road. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Eshowe Crime Prevention Unit and Eshowe detectives at Nqoleni arrested a 28-year-old for illegal possession of a gun and ammunition.
A 29-year-old nabbed by the Newcastle Public Order Police Task Team also faces illegal gun possession charges as well as charges of house and armed robberies. 
The eThekwini Outer South SAPS cluster arrested an uMlazi man during a stop-and-search on Mangosuthu Highway near Mega City for possession of an unlicensed firearm with the serial number filed off and ammunition. 
Police said the firearms would be sent for ballistics testing to see if they were used in the commission of any crimes. 
In an area outside Gingindlovu, two people were arrested for possession of stolen property when they were found with 62 fridges, two washing machines and a microwave. 
All the suspects are expected to appear in various courts.
The Mercury