Durban - In keeping with his wishes, King Goodwill Zwelithini will on Friday celebrate his 70th birthday in style, at his two palaces in Nongoma.
The first part of the celebrations will be held at the eNyokeni royal palace in Nongoma and is expected to be attended by no less than 2000 people.
“That part will truly be a celebration and will be less about speeches. There will be performances by artists like (maskandi artist) Khuzani. 
“We just want to celebrate the king’s life because no king, in the history of the Zulu nation, has been on the throne for such a long time. 
“He has also achieved a lot and led through the difficult times of apartheid, and during the transition and now well into democracy,” Prince Thulani Zulu, the king’s brother and spokesperson, said yesterday.
Pomp and ceremony will be the order of the day, with traditionally clad amabutho expected to grace the event, while the SAPS will conduct a parade to give the national salute to the king.
Later on in the same day, the king will host a gala dinner at his Linduzulu palace, also in Nongoma. That event will be attended by about 1200 guests, including politicians, ambassadors, high ranking army officers, members of Parliament and other dignitaries. 
“I am not part of the team dealing with protocol and thus I cannot give you names of those who have confirmed, but I can tell you that we invited former presidents from different countries, amakhosi from Nigeria and we also invited the Royal house of Swaziland,” Zulu said.
The Mercury understands that IFP leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Rev Kenneth Moshoe of the ACDP and Cope’s Mosioua Lekota will be among those expected to grace the event. Last year the king held similar celebrations at the Linduzulu palace, and at the event he expressed his wish to have even bigger celebrations for his 70th birthday.
Yesterday Zulu declined to say how much this year’s event would cost, but said ordinary subjects and businesspeople were also contributing towards the hosting of the celebrations.
He also would not say how many cows would be slaughtered for the celebrations, saying it would depend on the number of people who attend.
“Security will be tightened even on the roads because we just want this day to be about celebrations.”
The Mercury