DURBAN - KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo will on Wednesday visit the family of Cacisile Gumede, the woman allegedly murdered by a man who committed suicide at a busy uMlazi intersection on Sunday morning.
Gumede, 34, was a data capturer for the health department's Msunduzi Clinic in Cato Ridge. 
She was killed on Saturday night, allegedly, by Mozambican builder Sdimi Ngwane, who shot himself in the head on Sunday morning in a video that went viral on social media.
According to reports, Ngwane had been building a house for Gumede before he allegedly shot her dead on Saturday night.
In the video, a disorientated looking Ngwane is seen outside a VW Golf car which is parked in the middle of the road. He is seen carrying a firearm and loosely fires shots. Seconds later, he appears to shoot himself in the head, while a member of the public records the incident from afar. 
Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed Ngwane had shot Gumede and police were investigating a murder docket and an inquest docket for his own alleged suicide.
“It is alleged on 30 June 2018, at 7pm, at Jojo road, Mhali area, a body of a 34-year-old woman who was identified as Cacisile Gumede was found with a gunshot wound to the neck. She was declared dead at the scene. A case of murder is being investigated by Umsunduzi SAPS. The suspect in the case is the one who shot himself at V section, Umlazi,” said Zwane. 
Gumede was described as a dedicated and hardworking member of the data capturing team by peers. She is survived by her mother and two children aged seven and 12. 
Dhlomo said the department was shocked by the incident.
“Since July is men’s month, we are also highlighting the need for men to take action against women abuse. We wish to offer our deepest condolences to Gumede’s family, colleagues and friends and, of course the family of the perpetrator, whom we are told is from Mozambique, because a sudden and unexpected tragedy such as this one must be devastating for both sides,” he said.
DAILY NEWS