Durban - The Gold Cup Festival of Racing at Greyville Racecourse on July 28 is a day of celebration, lifestyle, fashion, food and horseracing.
The festival coincides with the end of South African horseracing’s Champions Season, with many
of the feature races on the day deciding the winners of the various categories at the national Equus Awards.

The organisers say the aim this year is to start the realignment of Gold Cup Day, moving it conceptually so that it earns the title as the “polo of horseracing”, with “* ” standing for posh and powerful; “o” standing for out of the ordinary; “* ” for lively and “o” for organised.

They said the ultimate goal is to create a premium image for years to come and an exciting experience for everyone. “A new and exciting addition to the event is an offering of private premier picnic sites positioned on beautiful grass lawns right alongside the track, getting you close up and personal with the galloping thoroughbreds thundering past.”

There are fully catered packages, including gourmet picnic baskets, refreshments, entry tickets on the day and complimentary betting vouchers all aligned to a picnic site with full décor, bespoke pallet furniture and a fantastic ambience, creating a premium outdoor experience that is ideal for corporate hospitality, customer entertainment or just a fun day out with friends.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

There will also be a street food market that will serve a wide range of culinary options that includes gourmet burgers, fancy waffles and gin tins.

“This vibey and relaxed area allows for something for everyone accompanied by dedicated areas for the public to sit and enjoy relaxing chill zones without missing out on the racecourse action,” the organisers said.

They said there were also options for corporates looking to entertain, with VIP private rooms with stunning views and numerous individual VIP hospitality options available -including bespoke VIP bar facilities, complimentary bar services with catering inside the premium-styled VIP rooms, private tote betting facilities and private toilet facilities.

Mark Taylor, chief executive of eLan Property Group, said: “The eLan Gold Cup is a highlight for us as this prestigious event provides a unique opportunity to spend time with customers, friends and associates, also allowing for all who attend to make new connections. 

“The race day is also the culmination of a competition in which we give away a stunning piece of land at Blythedale Coastal Estate worth R1million. The outcome of the marathon eLan Gold Cup race determines who wins this awesome prize, so it is a particularly dramatic and exciting day all round.”

To stand a chance to win the prize, racegoers must complete an entry form on race day. 

The winner will be the “virtual owner” of the horse that wins the eLan Gold Cup race. With The Mercury, you could also win a fabulous overseas holiday. Entry forms will be in The Mercury and the winner will be drawn after the Mercury Sprint race.

Mike Makaab, the chief executive of Prosport International, said: “Going into the second year of our involvement with this exciting horseracing extravaganza, we have been working tirelessly behind the scenes to create a unique spectacle combining top-class racing, entertainment and lifestyle. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Our aim is to give everyone who attends the excitement of world-class racing, combining speed, stamina and middle-distance racing, while still enjoying a great outing with good friends. 

“The Festival of Racing, featuring the eLan Gold Cup, offers a fitting end to South Africa’s Champions Season.”



*  Punters get a head start on the day with a R30 complimentary betting voucher when you buy your entrance ticket. All tickets are available at Computicket and at the gate at Greyville Racecourse.
The Mercury