Durban - Abahlali baseMjondolo  fear for their lives due to an  escalation of threats against them, and have resorted to ­hiring private investigators to  investigate these threats.
The organisation’s leadership announced on Sunday that it was enlisting the help of private investigators, because they no longer trust the authorities to adequately address their security concerns.

They also said they feared that some of the killings of their members could be politically motivated.

They claimed they were forced to cancel a community meeting this past week in the Mariannhill area because of threats. 

Related ArticlesEvicted shack families win right to return to their homesMayor Zandile Gumede says 'third hand' behind Durban shack dwellers movementOne of the shack-dwellers’ movement leaders, Sifiso Ngcobo, was shot dead in the area about two months ago.

“A lot of blood of the Abahlali members has been spilled, and there is no explanation for that. The authorities are not making any real headway into getting to the bottom of these killings,” said Abahlali leader in the Durban area Mqapheli Bonono.

“Our leaders continue to receive threats. One of our senior leaders, S’bu Zikode, has been getting death threats,” said Bonono.

In a statement, the organisation accused the ANC of wanting to classify them as terrorists in an effort to de-
legitimise their struggle.

“We have been warned from credible sources that the ANC in Durban is planning to present our movement as a terrorist organisation to legitimise  further repression,” said the statement.

“We have been through this kind of experience before, when we have been presented as criminals, and as a ‘third force’, to justify repression.

“However, we wish to make it clear that if another attempt is made on S’bu Zikode’s life, or on the life of any one of our members or comrades, we will hold eThekwini ANC directly responsible,” said the statement. Bonono said: “In the past there were negative statements about us, and that led to the attack on our members. This is happening again.”

ANC Chief Whip in eThekwini Municipality Nelly Nyanisa said they had never, nor would they ever classify the organisation as a terrorist group, because they know what the name means, and the implications of such a name.

“At one point we (ANC) were called terrorist,” she said. 

“We want a better way to address the land issue, rather than this barbaric matter of land invasions. It is costing us a lot to develop land where people are already living on it,” she said. 
The Mercury