Durban - The municipal manager of the Richmond Municipality, Bongiwe Mnikathi, has been given seven days to explain why she should not be suspended, according to the municipality’s council.
The council took the decision during a special council meeting held on Wednesday. The special council followed a council meeting held on Monday, where a decision was taken to begin the process to suspend Mnikathi.

Speaker of the municipality, Samora Ndlovu, said the council had mandated mayor Sibusiso Mchunu to brief Mnikathi on the way forward.

“The Richmond council has issues relating to allegations of corruption that it wants to investigate against the municipal manager. But the municipal manager, like all citizens, has the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty and to follow due process. 
Related ArticlesKnives out for Richmond municipal manager

“The council has told her she should make representations as to why she should not be suspended but, as things stand, she is still at work,” said Ndlovu.

He said the municipality couldn’t discuss the allegations against Mnikathi with the media “until such time that she has made representations to the council”. 

News reports have stated that among the allegations against Mnikathi is that she hired a close relative to work as a bodyguard, and that she does not attend meetings. 

The decision to follow due process looks to be a climb-down by the council, as it had shown resolve to suspend her on Monday and e-mails were anonymously distributed to newsrooms earlier this week stating that she would be suspended. 

There were also reports on Tuesday that she had clashed with security guards at the council when she came to collect items from her office. 

“I do not want to speak about what happened yesterday (Tuesday) and I cannot speak on how (the work environment) for the municipal manager will be in light of what happened,” said Ndlovu.

He said the Richmond council was “disappointed by the remarks of the DA and the IFP, which suggested the council had not followed the law.

“They should be concerned about the process and they should also be concerned about the allegations of corruption that have been made,” said Ndlovu. 

A source in the municipality said staff members were not happy about Mnikathi’s presence at the municipality. 

Attempts to reach Mnikathi for comment were unsuccessful as her phone was off. 
The Mercury