Durban - In a drive to encourage taxpayers to use eFiling for all tax transactions, the South African Revenue Service (SARS) has removed boxes for the submission of income tax returns and other paper documents.

Acting SARS commissioner Mark Kingon said in his assessment of branch volumes, the reason for taxpayer visits and who was filing a tax return, millions of people went into a branch who were not required and could have transacted on eFiling

“We want to show taxpayers that filing your return can be an easy exercise, and that you need not stand in a queue or make a special trip to one of our branches to file.” he said.

The new system implemented on July 1 will no longer provide certain printed forms at branches, including forms used to register as a taxpayer, as a VAT vendor and as an employer as well as forms used to apply for tax directives.

The increase in digital transactions means a significant saving on paper, printing and courier costs for both SARS and the taxpayer.  

SARS has made a special counter available to assist taxpayers to upload their returns and documents.

“While we are encouraging taxpayers to opt for our digital filing platform, axpayers who wish to be assisted can visit a branch where their information will be captured online. There will be a dedicated counter where their documents will be scanned and the originals handed back to them for safekeeping.” said media liaison officer Janine Mqulwana

 

Mqulwana said taxpayers will be assisted at branches, especially on transactions such as verifying banking details.

“Most transactions can be done on eFiling including filing, making a payment or lodging an objection or dispute.” said Mqulwana.

The Helo-You-eFile service will connect tax agents with taxpayers to complete their tax returns online.

eFilling, which was introduced ten years ago, is available 24 hours a day and there are also email addresses available on the SARS website for taxpayers to interact with SARS, as well as the SARS Contact Centre (0800 00 7277)

“Going paperless is a process, it will not take effect immediately but gradually and with assistance to the taxpayer.” Mqulwana said. 

The Mercury