Durban - Armed with a dream of one day getting his PhD in Psychology, a 26-year-old homeless man has started selling books on the Durban beachfront to raise money to complete his studies.
Kagiso Phihlela, left his family in Limpopo and travelled to Durban in April with the hope of finding a job to pay for his Postgraduate Certificate in Education from the Management College of Southern Africa (Mancosa).
“I came here looking for a job so that I would be able to pay for my studies myself, but I couldn’t get a job and ended up on the streets,” he said.
With the end of registration fast approaching, Phihlela has two more days to raise R3600 to register to study his first semester with Mancosa.
“My target is R3600, but I’m not sure if I’ll be able to reach the target because registration ends on July 31, which is Tuesday (tomorrow),” he said.
Having already achieved a Bachelor of Commerce in Accountancy from the University of Limpopo, Phihlela plans to continue selling books to fund the furthering of his studies.
“I have all kinds of books, novels, books on accounting, economics, law books, all kinds, which are very cheap. Some are R10, others are R20 or R30,” he said.
Currently living in a Durban city shelter, Phihlelo was introduced to book selling at the Denis Hurley Centre.
Raymond Perrier, the director of the centre, said the aim of the Bookseller Of Mzansi initiative was to train homeless people as booksellers to “connect people who want books with people who sell books”.
“Publisher Anivesh Singh volunteers his services by collecting books, storing them at his warehouse and distributing them to the booksellers,” Perrier said. 
Perrier said that they were looking for venues for the booksellers to sell their books.
Phihlela said he planned to sell books outside Mini Town on Sundays, but would be approaching the city for a permit to expand his target areas.
“I’m going to the City Hall tomorrow to see if I can get a permit to sell in other places,“ he said.
Phihlela said the motivation to complete his studies was to put “a smile” on his mother’s face, because she wanted him to study.
“She said, ‘When you have education, no one can take it away from you. Possessions can be taken away but not education’,” said Phihlela.
Once his studies are complete, Phihlela wants to help students who face similar issues he faced. 
The Mercury