Durban - Grant beneficiaries looking for assistance at offices of the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) in KwaZulu-Natal should brace themselves for long delays, as workers are embarking on a “go-slow” protest this week.
The workers affiliated with the Public Service Association (PSA) held protests across the country on Monday.

The union declared a dispute with Sassa, after rejecting the salary increases that had been accepted by other unions within the Department of Public Service Administration. 

Claude Naiker, the KwaZulu-Natal manager of PSA, said about 400 of their members had participated in a march to deliver a memorandum 
of grievances to Sassa’s provincial office in Pietermaritzburg. 

“This led to many offices in the provinces being shut down. We will continue with the action."

“In many of our offices, especially those around Durban and Empangeni, which are our biggest offices, we will be on a go-slow and in the smaller offices we will be picketing around lunch,” he said.

Hundreds of community members at many Sassa offices in Pietermaritzburg and other parts of the province were left stranded on Monday.

There were allegations that some grant beneficiaries had not been paid due to the chaos but this was denied by the Sassa provincial office.

DA councillor in the Northdale area, Rooksana Ahmed, said thousands of people had been frustrated by the protest, adding that some people had not even been able to collect their grants.

“I had a meeting with the Sassa manager at Bombay Civic Centre on Monday morning regarding why people were unable to collect grants."

“I had to address the crowds of people who are desperate, many of whom were very angry.

“This has had a severe impact on the poorest of the poor. Many will have to return to Sassa today as their monies are short in their accounts,” she said. 

Sassa provincial spokesperson Vusi Mahaye said those affected were mostly coming 
to register and to make enquiries.

He said their offices in many parts of the province including the Midlands, Durban and northern KwaZulu-Natal were affected.

“The staff led by their union marched to our offices (in Pietermaritzburg) on Monday and delivered a memorandum. We will forward that memorandum to the national office, as this was a national competence,” said Mahaye.
The Mercury