Pick n Pay became the first South African retailer to trial compostable bags as an environmentally friendly alternative to plastic bags. 
The one-day trial at its V&A Waterfront store on Tuesday gauged customer reaction which will inform further industry discussions on alternatives to plastic bags. 

The customer trial replaced all plastic carrier bags, barrier bags and fruit & vegetable bags with compostable bags made from starches, cellulose, vegetable oils and combinations. 
Related ArticlesFlight Centre Foundation has launched a recycling initiativeHawks probe eThekwini's recycling bag tenderMMC has recycling in the bagFlight Centre Foundation has launched a recycling initiativeHawks probe eThekwini's recycling bag tenderMMC has recycling in the bagFlight Centre Foundation has launched a recycling initiative12The “not made from plastic” carrier bags were given free to customers on the day. Cardboard boxes were also piloted with customers – at R5 per box – as another alternative to plastic carrier bags. 

Speaking at the initiative’s launch, Pick n Pay Chairman Gareth Ackerman, said: “Much progress has been made since 2003 to encourage customers to move away from single-use plastic carrier bags, but much more needs to be done. Sustainable solutions require all parties involved – retailers, government, plastic manufacturers, consumers and recyclers – to work together collaboratively – and well beyond plastic bags to all forms of waste. 

“But the truth of it is that without clear integrated waste management plans, and investment in infrastructure from Government, we will never, on our own as retailers, be able to make a sustainable impact. Simply put, Government needs to intensify its commitment to recycling and waste management." 


Pick n Pay’s director for Transformation Suzanne Ackerman-Berman said that the ags piloted with customers are strong and can be reused, similar to normal plastic bags. 
“The important difference is that these trial bags are also home compostable. They are designed to collect organic waste, such as your kitchen scraps, and will compost with the organic waste in a home compost environment," she said.

Ackerman-Berman explained that depending on the composting system the bag will break down in months rather than hundreds of years.

“The bag will break down after three to six months - depending on the composting system - as opposed to the reported 500 to 1,000 years for plastic bags. Customers can also bring the bags back to our stores and we will take them to a Pick n Pay composting facility,”  she said. 

While the home composable bags have been rolled out across Europe, North America and Australia, and exclusively with retailers in Italy, this is the first time South African consumers can try out the option.


“Given this option is still in its infancy in South Africa, there are several considerations to look at before they could be introduced at scale. Currently, for example, there are no integrated large-scale composting facilities available. During National Recycling Month in September, we will initiate the conversation with retailers, recyclers, manufacturers and the plastics industry on this issue,” said Ackerman.

The exact retail price for compostable carrier bags has not yet been determined.
As the project is still in its pilot phase, KZN shoppers will have to wait with the rest of South Africa for these environmentally friendly bags to be rolled out nationally.