Durban - Police Minister Bheki Cele has been accused by fellow ANC member and Umkhonto we Sizwe spokesperson Carl Niehaus of abuse of power and using his position to intimidate him.
Niehaus told The Mercury on Monday that he had written a letter to the chairperson of the ANC’s disciplinary committee, Edna Molewa, complaining about his encounter with Cele.

Cele, through his spokesperson Reneilwe Serero, dismissed the allegations against him, saying he was not aware of them.

“The minister did not push anyone’s shoulder, or threaten anyone or abuse his powers. All the allegations being made he is not aware of them,” Serero said. 

Related ArticlesLennit Max now special advisor to Bheki CeleCele cautioned about appointment of MaxWATCH: Police launch their own anti-corruption strategyWATCH: Bheki Cele promises increased police visibility for ChatsworthLennit Max now special advisor to Bheki CeleCele cautioned about appointment of MaxWATCH: Police launch their own anti-corruption strategyWATCH: Bheki Cele promises increased police visibility for Chatsworth12When contacted by The Mercury, Cele said he could not speak as he was busy chairing a meeting.

Cele and Niehaus were in opposing camps in the run-up to the ANC conference last year. Niehaus supported Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma while Cele was a vocal critic of state capture, which implicated former president Jacob Zuma’s close associates - the Gupta family, and appeared to back Cyril Ramaphosa. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


Niehaus refused to share the contents of the letter he submitted to Molewa yesterday morning, but said he felt that Cele had abused his position as a NEC member and police minister.

The clash between Cele and Niehaus allegedly played out in full view of mourners at the funeral of Zuma’s son, Vusi Zuma, at the Rhema Church in Randburg, Johannesburg, at the weekend.

Niehaus said: “I was sitting in the third row of the VIP section at the funeral, with the former premier of North West  Supra Mahumapelo, when Cele approached me in a very aggressive and threatening manner, and said to me that I should not speak about him in the media.

“I had extended my hand to shake his, but he rejected it and pushed me on a shoulder. He very aggressively said: “I will sort you out”, which could be taken to have a broad meaning,” he said. 

Niehaus said even after the funeral, as they exited, some of the leaders approached Cele to get him to apologise for the behaviour because “it was ­embarrassing and had brought the ANC into disrepute”, but he very arrogantly refused.

“I also approached him to say that if there were issues between us, we could meet at a different time and place and we could sort that out, but he refused to even take my hand,” Niehaus said. 

He said that although he felt threatened by Cele, he was still not certain of what had angered the minister, and he would not allow himself to be threatened by anyone.

“I spoke at King Goodwill’s land imbizo last week, where I stated that the ANC had not taken a position on the issue of the land under the Ingonyama Trust. I did not say anything different to what was said by the president of the ANC and the KZN premier, Willies Mchunu.

“During the imbizo I spoke about the misconception of ANC ­policy on the issue of the Ingonyama Trust land. 

“The policy of the ANC states that any member has a responsibility to ­correct misconceptions about ANC policies in public.”

Niehaus said during an interview with eNCA on Thursday, a day after the imbizo, that Cele had been at the imbizo, but had not corrected the misconception of the ANC policy on the matter. 

“I have since written to the chair of the disciplinary committee, and the matter is now in her hands,” he said.

Edna Molewa’s spokesperson, Zanele Mngadi, directed  questions about the matter to the ANC, saying it was an ANC matter. 

ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said he would comment once he had had a chance to speak to Molewa.
The Mercury