Durban - Renowned South African filmmaker Anant Singh has released a documentary to commemorate the centenary of Nelson Mandela.
Celebrating Mandela One Hundred is a documentary feature conceptualised and produced by Singh, and will premier at the Durban International Film Festival, which starts on Thursday and will run to July29. 

On Mandela Day, Singh and his production company will present the documentary at the official celebrations of the South African embassy in Russia. 

Singh is in Moscow on his first visit since 1989 when he premiered his film The Stick, which was banned by the apartheid government.

“I have always been fascinated with Madiba’s life story, and began communicating with him while he was in prison about making a film about him. 

“Over the years I have made a number of films about Madiba, documenting important events, and I felt it was important to mark his 100th birthday with a special tribute. Celebrating Mandela One Hundred is this tribute,” said Singh.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The film was produced with the support and endorsement of the Nelson Mandela Foundation.  

Singh said it gave a glimpse of Mandela’s rich life, traversing the personal and public spheres of his life.  

It is enhanced with authentic re-enactments, and features Mandela’s family and friends, including his widow Graca Machel, his late ex-wife Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, his daughters Zenani and Zindzi Mandela, fellow Robben Island prisoners Ahmed Kathrada and Walter Sisulu, and former ANC president in exile, Oliver Tambo. 

It also includes interviews with Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu, former US presidents Bill Clinton and ­Barack Obama, and a host of global celebrities including Idris Elba, Naomie Harris, Whoopi Goldberg and Blair Underwood.

It is one of three films about the statesman at the festival Another is An Act Of Defiance, which is directed by Jean van de Velde, which tells the story of Bram Fischer, who managed to reconcile his white ­Afrikaner roots with his desire for justice, joining the Struggle out of principle. 

He defended Nelson Mandela and his comrades in the Rivonia Trial of 1963 and 1964 - playing a crucial role in preventing the ANC-leaders being sentenced to death - and was an underground guerrilla at the same time. 

Linking in with this film is The State Against Mandela and the Others, directed by Nicolas Champeaux, Gilles Porte, which is a documentary based on recently recovered archival recordings of the Rivonia Trial hearings.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
THE MERCURY