Durban - A teacher at a primary school in Umbumbulu in KwaZulu-Natal is in hot water after she allegedly “hit” a pupil with a stick, putting him in hospital for a week.
Bheka Kweyama, the father of the child, has since opened a criminal case against the teacher and the school.
Kweyama said that last month, his 9-year-old son Nhlakanipho, a Grade 4 pupil, was playing with other children close to the teacher's cottage on the school’s premises when they banged on the cottage door.
He said the teacher came out and hit the boys on their hands with a stick.
“That afternoon when my son came home he complained about the pain in his hand. The following morning his hand was swollen and he could ­hardly use it.
“I saw that his hand was seriously injured, and we took him to the clinic. At the clinic he was referred to the Prince Mshiyeni Hospital.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“The doctors at Mshiyeni said the hand needed to be operated on, and after the operation he had to stay in the hospital for about a week. The teacher only hit him three times, but they seem to have been very strong strokes,” said Kweyama.
He added that he had reported the matter to the education department. “I want the department to get involved because it seems quite clear that some of the people they employ are not well trained in their policies.”
He said his child was now fearful of going back to school. 
“He seems to be afraid to go back because of the ordeal.
"And that puts me in a difficult position as I may have to place him at another school. I also have to take him for counselling.”
Kweyama said he was also unhappy with the teacher.
“She knows the child was in hospital, but has not made any effort to speak to the family to address this, or help the family by contributing to some of these medical bills and travelling expenses.” AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala confirmed that a case of assault was being investigated by Umbumbulu SAPS, but said no arrests had been made.
Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said they had not been briefed on the incident. 
“Our position is that corporal punishment is illegal, and we have always taken action against teachers who use it.
“We urge the parent to take the child to school, and we will send our district officers to investigate the matter,” said Mahlambi. 
The Mercury