Durban - In as little as two months, up to 12 children will have a safe place to call home when the Phoenix Child and Welfare Society opens Phoenix’s first children’s home.
With child protection being its core function, the society, established in 1981, helps child abuse victims of all ages and offers foster care as well as adoption for abandoned children.
Aroona Chetty, director of Phoenix Child and Welfare Society, said the society purchased a property with two homes on it which will house the children.
“One cottage will be for boys and the other for girls. We have plans to build two more cottages with a communal kitchen, dinning hall and laundry,” said Chetty.

 

Still in the setting up phase, Chetty says she has a “long wish list” of necessities and comforts to make it feel like home.
“It’s like setting up a home. I’ve got beds, I’ve got somebody that promised me burglar guards. I still need a boundary wall. I need a lounge set, crockery, cutlery and linen,” she said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 

The NGO, partially subsidised by the government, is one of several that are hosting a marquee at the eLan Gold Cup at Greyville this Saturday.
“Money from the fund-raiser will be going towards the children’s home, the shelter and running costs, everything is very expensive,” Chetty said.
The society, which serves the Phoenix, Mount Moriah and Mount Royal communities, also run the Sahara shelter for abused women and their children, based in Phoenix.
Chetty said that for the past four months she has received daily calls for accommodation but, as it is filled to capacity, she has to refer them to other shelters. 
“At the moment I have 13 children there with 10 moms which is over my capacity. We can only take in 22 but I couldn’t send a child away,” she said.
She said the shelter known as the “healing and therapy centre”, had a live-in social worker and 12 staff who provide solace, advice and upliftment. 
She (social worker) gives them advice to go and get protection at court, we take the children to school. We help them find employment. We teach them skills as well,” Chetty said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
In 2016, after 9-year-old Shahiel Sewpujun was killed by a relative, the society started running homework centres for children who are at risk.
“A lot of children in Phoenix go home to nobody and are looking after themselves. The homework centres give them a meal and also helps them with their homework. They get home just before their moms and dads come back from work,” Chetty said.
There are now three homework centres but Chetty is hopeful that with funding there will be “one in every school if it’s possible”.
The society also runs a children’s foundation community project, where children take care of other children and get involved in other projects.
The Mercury