Durban - It is alleged that one of the marquees, to be used for the Durban South Regional Business Fair this weekend, was deliberately set alight. 

 

 Municipal officials and sources, told 
 The Mercury that the recent arson incidents could be linked to the ongoing protests by business people, subcontracted to remove refuse in uMlazi and other townships.

Related ArticlesWATCH: Vehicles set alight in N2 protestHowever, Mandla Nsele, the spokesperson for the municipality would not be drawn on the motive for this attack. 
“We don’t know, police are investigating the matter,” Nsele said.
The business fair was expected to go ahead as planned today, despite the arson attack, he said.
When The Mercury visited the scene on Thursday, a group of municipal workers were still setting up in another marquee adjacent to the one set alight.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Those who spoke on condition of anonymity said they believed it was arson. 
The attack came after refuse collection subcontractors working in uMlazi and other townships on the south, went on a rampage earlier this week, dumping rubbish on the N2. 
They vowed to step up their protests, if they did not receive monies owed to them for work done in May and June.
Police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbhele, could only confirm that police were investigating a case of malicious damage to property and added that no arrests were made.
Meanwhile, the police have yet to make an arrest in a case in which trucks belonging to a private contractor, who had been involved in the Go Durban project, were torched on Tuesday night.
Mbhele said four armed men accosted the security guard at the company’s premises and tied him up, before setting the vehicles alight.
Gavin Naidoo, of Chapps Construction, said two TLBs, two excavators and six trucks were damaged. He said the motive behind the attack raises suspicion because nothing was stolen. He estimated the damage amounted to about R10million. 
Naidoo, who specialises in road construction, said he was involved in the construction of Go Durban infrastructure. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“But that contract is almost finished and therefore it would not make any sense for anyone to burn the trucks because of that,” he said. 
However, Naidoo said he felt the arson attacks flaring up in the city were “too much of a coincidence”.
Despite the loss he personally suffered, he said all the operators of the machines were not without jobs and he hoped the police would get to the bottom of the matter.
The Mercury reported a few weeks ago that construction of the Go Durban project was halted in Pinetown, following threats from some people who were not happy with not getting a stake in the development. 
In an unrelated incident yesterday cars were stoned and one set alight by angry protesters on the N2 highway, near Chesterville.
Metro police spokesperson, Parboo Sewpersad, said the protesters were allegedly protesting against the demolishing of shacks by the city council’s security personnel. 
“They also tried to set alight a petrol tanker but were stopped by the police,” he said. 
The Mercury