Durban - Police Minister Bheki Cele says more arrests are imminent following what the authorities say is the biggest drug laboratory bust in recent history.
Cele was speaking at the Port Shepstone Organised Crime offices, where the massive haul of drugs, believed to be mandrax, was moved to - after being found on a farm. 
Two people were arrested following an operation which was months in the works - by the Hawks, Crime Intelligence, Port Shepstone Tactical Response Team and K9 Units - on a farm at Harding in the KZN southern districts on Wednesday. 
The pair are believed to be workers on the 10ha property which was masquerading as a sheep farm. 
Cele said police became suspicious when no sheep were found so it was clear that it was being operated solely as a drug manufacturing plant. 
He also believed that the drug production business was well established as older equipment as well as two new tablet manufacturing machines were found. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Cele said these were valued at about R1million each which, together with the amount of drugs found, indicated the large scale of production. “This is a very serious factory, it’s more serious than other established factories. They changed the structure of the house and built a wall around it, clearly this was a growing business,” said Cele. 
He said they were also investigating a farm recently purchased by the same owner in the Midlands, as it was likely that this too was a front for drug manufacturing. 
Some of the drugs were found already pressed into tablets kept in plastic bags by the hundreds. 
Others were still in powder form, in buckets stacked in a room, and more had been packed in black plastic bags sealed with tape. 
Although there were reports of the drugs being valued at R150million, police said this could not yet be confirmed. 
“Drugs and substance abuse is a serious problem and we will find these so-called factories and shut them down one by one,” said Cele. 
“We will continue with the strengthening of the multidisciplinary approach in responding to crimes of this nature and intensify our campaign by working together with our sister departments and relevant stakeholders in the fight against drug and substance abuse,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Cele was accompanied by the National Police Commissioner General Khehla Sitole and the head of the Hawks, General Godfrey Lebeya. 
The Mercury