Durban - Durban police say the 17-year-old boy charged with the alleged rape of a five-year-old girl at the Umgeni Bird Park is at home awaiting his next court appearance.
Police spokesperson Thulani Zwane said that after the teen’s court appearance in the Durban Magistrate’s Court last Tuesday, he was released into the custody of his parents.

The teenager, who was in a volunteer programme at the park, is alleged to have raped the child on June 23.

The city said in a statement that it had shut down the volunteer programme completely.

“According to reports received, a family was hosting a birthday party at Umgeni River Bird Park, when one of the school holiday volunteers allegedly lured two little girls towards an area of the park that is not open to members of the public. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“He allegedly molested one of the girls, and when the other girl realised what was happening, she ran to alert the adults in the group.”

The police were immediately called to the scene and the alleged perpetrator was arrested. 

“The municipality arranged for counselling of the child through ChildLine. The municipality regrets this unfortunate incident and assures all our patrons that their safety is our top priority.” 

The city said the bird park had 24-hour security personnel who patrol the area. 

Child protection consultant Joan van Niekerk said she was shocked to hear of the incident at the Umgeni  Bird Park because it had always been a wonderful place to take children.

“One wonders about the screening process for volunteers, but these are not foolproof. It is tragic for everyone in the programme that has been shut down because of one person’s actions”.

She added that boys needed to be taught about their sexual responsibilities.

“They need to be taught to control their sexual needs so that these needs don’t encroach on the rights of others. We need to teach boys that their superior strength should be used to protect and not harm.”

Van Niekerk, who has just completed research into the child protection system in South Africa, said she had found that the system was failing in its response and prevention efforts.

“The country pours millions of rand into prevention strategies raising awareness, but this is not enough; we need to look seriously at how we raise our boys.”

Sharing findings from her research, she said many children who had been abused fell through the cracks of the system because components of the system - including police, social workers and the courts - lacked co-ordination.

“The legal process takes far too long, which leads to many cases being withdrawn. And with the legal process taking too long, this means the child’s life is put on hold for a year to two years. This is of concern.”

She had found that lack of resources in the child protection system was also a problem, and there was a need to merge traditional mechanisms with modern ones in dealing with the abuse of children.

Van Niekerk said that in rural areas, some abuse cases never made it to police stations as official cases to be investigated because families accepted damages in the form of money or cattle from perpetrators.

“We ignore these mechanisms instead of integrating them into modern ones. 

“Damages paid should be accompanied with the process of the law, because the law allows for children who abuse others to be put into programmes,” she said.
The Mercury