Durban - Umlazi residents who attempted to build houses in a Chatsworth nature reserve have given the city seven days to respond to their demand for land.
On Sunday they marched along a route near the Silverglen Nature Reserve before handing over a memorandum of demands to the police. 

March leader Mbulelo ­Hadebe said they had expected eThekwini mayor Zandile ­Gumede to accept their memorandum, but it was instead ­accepted by police in her ­absence. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“If we don’t get a response in seven days, we will march to her office at the (Durban) City Hall,” said Hadebe. 

Several police vehicles, including a water cannon, monitored the march, but Metro Police spokesperson Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad said the group had proceeded peacefully along the route as per the permit granted, and dispersed quietly. 

Almost two weeks ago, the uMlazi residents started clearing vegetation and demarcated land for building homes in the nature reserve. 

But they were stopped by security and the eThekwini anti-land-invasion unit. 

Hadebe said they came from various sections of ­uMlazi. 

“Our expanding families have outgrown our houses. We saw vacant land and we want the municipality to allow us to build our homes there. If not, they must give us other land. We are not expecting to pay for the land of our forefathers,” said Hadebe. 

He said residential development would also help curb the rampant crime in the area.  

Ward councillor Tony Govender agreed that criminals had used the reserve as a hiding place and that Chatsworth and uMlazi residents had fallen victim to muggings and other crimes over the years. 

However, he said the reserve was being upgraded. 

“It is a far cry from what it was two decades ago. It used to be a vibrant hub of activity, with picnic areas and a place for a fun family day for people from all over. But it is being revived now to bring it back to its former glory.” 

Govender said there was a beautiful natural lake, diverse fauna and flora as well as bird life which, he said, would be lost if houses were built on the reserve. 

Just two months ago city ­officials had met with experts to develop strategic action plans to ensure that the improvements planned for the reserve were sustainable. 

They had billed the reserve as having “the potential to transform into a lucrative eco-tourism hub”.

In a report from the municipality, Area Based Management head Linda Mbonambi said the main ­objective was to alleviate crime and strengthen the relationship between the Chatsworth community and the reserve. 

She had said the revitalisation of the reserve had gained international attention, and was being used as a case study in Germany to highlight the positive impact of revitalising green spaces.

“The 460ha conservancy has historic significance as it is home to the Silverglen Nursery, which was the first medicinal plant nursery to be established in Africa. 

“The reserve is also the largest conservation site in the eThekwini area,” read the report. 

While Hadebe said he understood the need for conservation, plants and animals could not be placed above the needs of people. He said it was not their aim to destroy the ­reserve so they would only build on half of it. 

But Govender said that as much as Chatsworth residents would like to see people have homes, the reserve was the area’s only green lung, and it would be sad if the Durban Metropolitan Open Space System area was destroyed. 
The Mercury