DURBAN - South Africa’s former Consul General to London Cyril Ndaba has questioned the appointment date of Thabisile Ncayiyane.
Ncayiyane allegedly shared a close relationship with eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede, and as a result, was given the position Ndaba had applied for. 
She subsequently lost the post when she could not provide her qualifications to the municipality’s human resources department. However, she was placed in another position, as a ghost employee.

Ndaba, who learnt through the Sunday Tribune last week that Ncayiyane was given an appointment letter as project executive: protocol ceremonial on Christmas Day two years ago, has laid a complaint with eThekwini Municipality and is consulting his lawyer about further action.

Related ArticlesDurban Mayor’s helper rakes in R50k, no qualificationsNdaba maintains he was shortlisted for the same position and attended an interview on December 30, 2016 - five days after the city’s human resources (HR) department had prepared Ncayiyane’s appointment letter.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He wanted to know how the appointment was made before candidates had been interviewed. “I was invited for an interview on December 30, it was on a Friday, and the same lady, who it has emerged was appointed on Christmas Day, was actually there to do an interview alongside me. She basically came for the interview when the letter of her appointment had already been made. What does that mean?”

“I now realise I was tricked.”

Ndaba said the interview panel on the day consisted of two people.

“There was a man who introduced himself as the acting chief of staff in the mayor’s office, and the other person was from HR. I was informed that the post had to be filled at the beginning of 2017 but, 18 months later, I have still not been told I was unsuccessful.”

Ndaba said he won’t let crooked officials get away with this. He said he felt degraded as an accomplished diplomat.
Thabisile Ncayiyane
“I will uphold my constitutional rights. I want to know what happened to this position. The mayor cannot interfere with recruitment processes as alleged. She cannot hire her own people.

I know could have walked into that post easily based on my 24 years international experience with Dirco (Department of International Relations and Co-operation).

“I was sure there was no candidate that would have competed with me. That position was junior for my experience. However, I applied because I am back in the country and wanted to help her office.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Acting head of communications, Mandla Nsele said a new candidate had been appointed after the post was re-advertised.

“Should any candidate feel aggrieved, they should refer them to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration.”

SUNDAY TRIBUNE