Durban - Thousands of patients needing eye operations in the province have to endure ­extended waiting periods that could last for more than a year.
About 8200 patients in the province are waiting for cataract surgery, according to a response from the MEC of Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, to parliamentary questions posed by the DA.

Provincial health department spokesperson Ncumisa Mafunda said the DA’s public statements on the issue left out material facts and were meant to create confusion and panic. 

She said that while there were challenges, patients were being attended to.

DA provincial spokesperson on Health, Dr Imraan Keeka, said the delays were the result of dysfunctional ophthalmology equipment.

Patients with cataracts usually experienced cloudy vision in mild cases, to loss of vision in severe cases. 

Keeka also said the number of patients waiting for an operation could be higher because two hospitals had not provided details about their operations.

“Of major concern is that the two hospitals that failed to provide the requested information on cataract patients on the waiting list, St Mary’s and Northdale, are some of the worst affected by poor service delivery,” he said.

“It is tragic that such a high number of patients are made to wait to have operations that will restore their vision,” he said. The response to the parliamentary questions showed that the waiting period varied from one month at Prince Mshiyeni Memorial Hospital, in uMlazi, to up to a year and a half at ­Ladysmith Hospital. 

The MEC said in response that about 10 hospitals performed the ­operations and had about 20 ophthalmologists. McCords Eye Hospital had the most, at six, followed by Inkosi Albert Luthuli hospital, with three.

At McCords, the waiting ­period varied based on the priority of the operations. A priority 1 patient, who is someone with cataracts in both eyes, drivers or those deemed to be economically active, had to wait only one month.

McCords and the Madadeni Hospital in Newcastle had the largest number of patients waiting, at 3000 each. 

“The response by MEC Dhlomo also confirms that there is dysfunctional equipment in five of the 10 facilities, which will no doubt increase waiting times,” said Keeka. 

Mafunda said the department had long-standing, valuable partnerships with NGOs that helped mitigate the impact of the staff shortages and problems with equipment.

“Although there are challenges with a shortage of staff who can perform this type of surgery, the department is doing its best to attract and retain more ophthalmologists, optometrists and specialist nurses,” she said. 

She added that patients ­requiring cataract surgery were triaged, counselled and prioritised according to how vision was affected in each eye. She said about 6616 cataract surgeries were conducted in KZN in the past financial year.
The Mercury