Durban - The future of the municipal manager at Richmond municipality, Bongiwe Mnikathi, hangs in the balance following the latest move to oust her.
The Mercury understands that the council met behind closed doors on Monday to consider a report from the Speaker’s office apparently detailing allegations against Mnikathi.

“There were many issues raised in that meeting. The report, which was later taken away from us after the meeting, lists a string of allegations of improper conduct on the part of the municipal man­a­ger,” a councillor who attended the sitting said.

However, Mnikathi was in the dark about all this. 

When contacted for comment, she said she was hearing the news for the first time and could therefore not comment as she had also not received ­any official correspondence from the council.

Also seemingly kept in the dark was the ANC leadership in the region. 

Regional secretary Mzi Zuma also claimed ignorance on the matter, saying: “We will await a report from the chief whip on the matter.

“Ordinarily the leadership of the municipality would inform us as the region, but now maybe there is a reason that has not happened. I will have to speak to them before I can give you anything,” Zuma said.

Asked if the ANC was not concerned about the stability of the municipality as its chief finance officer was also on suspension, Zuma said he would “comment in totality” once he had been briefed on the alleged suspension of the municipal manager.

An ANC councillor who spoke on condition of anonymity said the regional leadership wanted the decision reversed, but added that the majority of the ANC councillors were not willing to do this.

Another ANC councillor, however, questioned the process, saying that Mnikathi could not be suspended without being given a chance to make representations. 

“What should have happened is that council should write to her and in that letter detail all the allegations against her. She should then be given seven days within which to make representations. 

“That has not happened, and this thing could be easily challenged on procedural grounds,” said the councillor.

Some insiders also questioned why the report came from the Speaker’s office, given that the municipal manager accounts to the mayor.

DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango also expressed concerns about due process being followed. 

Process

“The process is questionable, that is our concern ­because the involvement of the Speaker worries us. 

“We appreciate any attempt to root out corruption no matter who is involved, but it should be carried out by following proper processes. 

“We believe that given the volatility in the area and the recent killings, such things should be dealt with carefully as any uncertainty could spark violence. We all know what happened to the former manager,” he said.

Mncwango was referring to the killing of the town’s former municipal manager, Sibusiso Sithole, who was gunned down in March last year.

Speaker Samora Ndlovu could not be reached for comment last night.
The Mercury