Durban - News of Msunduzi council’s intention to suspend city manager Sizwe Hadebe has been widely welcomed in Pietermaritzburg, with key role-players saying this was long overdue.
This follows a special council sitting on Monday where Hadebe was given seven days in which to indicate why he should not be suspended. 
Msunduzi mayor Themba Njilo confirmed that a letter was served on Hadebe expressing the intention to suspend him. The letter gives Hadebe seven days to state why he shouldn’t be suspended. 
Njilo said there would also be an investigation into allegations against Hadebe, which include alleged interference in the appointment of staff and awarding of contracts.
According to the mayor, the investigation is related to an audio clip that went viral a few months ago, implicating high-ranking officials and politicians in a jobs-for-pals arrangement. A petition written by senior general managers, complaining about Hadebe, will also form the basis of the investigation. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
South African Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) regional organiser Sibusiso Molefe said taking action against the city manager should have been happened a long time ago. 
“As an illustration of our concern about the state of affairs in the municipality, especially under Hadebe, we staged marches and wrote letters as early as April this year, calling for an investigation into the conduct of the city manager,” said Molefe.
But Njilo said the council could not act without any evidence and that was why the decision took so long to come.
DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said while they welcomed the decision by the ANC, they wanted a wider investigation. 
Pietermaritzburg Chamber of Business chief executive Melanie Veness also welcomed the council’s intention to take action against Hadebe. 
“Urgent intervention has been needed at Msunduzi for some time now. We are pleased that action is being taken at the top, because that’s where accountability resides. We hope that this is an indication that there is political will to put Msunduzi Municipality back on track at long last,” said Veness. 
There were many calls for action to be taken against Hadebe, including Monday’s picket outside the City Hall, which took place during a council sitting. 
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads