Durban - Fees Must Fall activist Bonginkosi Khanyile says the court case against him has impacted negatively on his life with the thought of having a criminal record attached to his name a concern for him as a recent graduate.
Khanyile’s trial was meant to proceed in the Durban Magistrate’s Court on Thursday but was adjourned for him to make formal admissions on four of the 18 counts he is charged with relating to fees must fall protests at the Durban University of Technology in September 2016.
Khanyile faces charges, including inciting public violence, possession of explosives, contravention of the Gatherings Act, possession of a dangerous weapon, failure to comply with police orders, common assault and hindering traffic.
Prosecutor Nkululeko Msiya said they had reached a consensus with Khanyile’s defence that he would plead guilty to the four charges and a formal admission was to be done by Khanyile in order to dispose of the matter. This means that the other charges fall away when the matter is back in court on August 13.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Speaking outside court, Khanyile said he was happy with the progress that had taken place with regards to his matter. “This is a 2016 case, I am eager to get it over and done”.
He said that if he was president of the country especially since government has approved what students were calling for, free education, he would ensure that those who fought for the cause don’t go through what he has been through.
“When young people are protesting for free education and not for things to be handed to them its important. Free education will help them provide for themselves - why subject students to prosecution in court for fighting for this?”
Khanyile graduated with a Bachelor of Technology degree in Public Management in May this year. This was a day after he was suspended for a month for taking part in violent student protests over the non payment of National Student Financial Aid Scheme allowances.
He says he is currently unemployed and furthering his studies. He is however concerned about getting employment within government with a criminal record.
“The impact of this case has been devastating to my life. I still remain unemployed while being subjected to court proceedings. I have been applying for internships but I worry about my chances of being employed in government," he said.
 The Independent on Saturday
 AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads