Durban - Polocrosse fans are in for a weekend of thrilling equestrian action as some of South Africa’s and the world’s highest ranked players are gearing up for the third Land Rover Durban High Goal Polocrosse Tournament, which will take place at the Durban Shongweni Club between June 22- 24.
Running each day between 9am and 4pm, the event will showcase the talents of some of the country’s best polocrosse players. There will be four matches daily, two ladies and two men’s, where world-class equestrian’s displays can be expected from national, as well as international players.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Commenting on the upcoming tournament, Shongweni Polocrosse Committee member, Sam Heynes said the High Goal Tournament has eight teams, four men’s and four ladies, which will compete for the top spot. Each team consists of six highly ranked players, each of whom is given a handicap.
"The handicap indicated his or her skills level, ranging between 0 (beginner) to 10 (highest ranking).  In a high goal competition, the team’s total combined handicap must average at 45 for men and 26 for ladies. Similar to last year’s event, the 2018 edition will feature Wild Card players in both the men’s and ladies categories, who will be auctioned off to the highest bidding team at a special black-tie gala dinner on June 20. The Wild Card feature creates an aura of surprise, as teams can only be finalised on the eve of the competition," Heynes said. 

This year’s wildcards are all of South Africa’s top-ranked players, who will be representing the country in next year’s World Cup in Queensland, Australia.

Brent Von Benecke, chairman of the Shongweni Polocrosse Club and event organiser said, “This is a premier event on the South African polocrosse calendar, featuring players of international ranking. Spectators are guaranteed an outstanding weekend filled with nail-biting sporting action.”

Von Benecke highlighted that each team will feature a Wild Card who is a top-ranked South African player who will play in next year’s World Cup.
The Mercury