EDITOR'S VIEW - It was horribly telling that 9-year-old Sadia Sukhraj was fatally shot in the abdomen in a car hijacking hours before the eThekwini council hosted a public meeting to address the crime issue.
While word was still spreading of Sadia’s heartbreaking end in Shallcross, the acting head of the metro police, Steve Middleton, was discussing counter-crime strategies with about 200 rate- payers and representatives of community policing forums at the Durban City Hall.

That the two events should happen hours apart was a vivid illustration of how life in South Africa has been violated by crime. It is happening all the time, steadily ruining this country.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The crime rate, and the worsening violence with it, is no figment of any sector of our community. Law-abiding people are living scared and on the defensive. It is affecting all, privileged or not.

Just last week this newspaper aired a crime expert’s view that police in South Africa were simply not coping with cash-in-transit heists. The worst-hit area for this type of crime is Gauteng - at present. Since publication, more happened. Yesterday, this newspaper reported on another in Polokwane on Monday. It goes on and on.
Also read: #RIPSadia - Durban mayor calls for calm

On Friday, a large, windowless truck with an armoured cabin was seen driving at speed from Durban to Johannesburg. Guarding it, front and back, was a weaving convoy of about 10 police vehicles. The cost of that protection - the manpower, the vehicles, the fuel - would have been hefty. It was indicative of the lengths necessary to keep criminals at bay.

But the cost of this escort would be a mere one-line item in the enormous bill that the state has to fend off crime. In Durban alone, the council’s bill for private security companies to guard municipal facilities is about R500million.

Such are the costs in rands and cents. Imagine, then, what the national cost is for the protection of government facilities. Then there are citizens’ private costs for personal security: these must amount to billions.

There is also the pain that crime causes. We wish the Sukhraj family, and countless other victims of violent crime, strength in their loss and grief.
LISTEN: This heartfelt message to #SadiaSukhraj's parents could make you cry

Sadia’s tragic shooting has angered Chatsworth residents. Passions are understandably high there, and elsewhere. So much so that criminals would be foolish at this time to operate as freely as they do in the greater Durban area, clearly without much regard for our police.

Fear and intense loathing for these tormentors do not justify vigilantism, though. Watchfulness and ready communication - expanding cellphone alert networks and neighbourhood patrol rosters - would be helpful in rendering entire areas hostile to these intruders.

In a three-year stint as police commissioner, new Police Minister Bheki Cele seemed to grasp citizens’ anxiety about crime. He also appeared to have a realistic view of the overall damage crime is inflicting.

He has much work to do. He has made some early, reassuring moves so far in top appointments. We sincerely hope that it is 
the start of truly effective counter-crime strategies.

The turnaround starts with active public co-operation with police, and the police winning back confidence from those they serve. Police must also take back respect from criminals.
The Mercury