Durban - Pupils of the Dundee Lower Secondary School were evacuated Thursday after one of them had a run-in with a snake, believed to be a Mozambican spitting cobra.
A teacher said the Grade2 pupil was playing just before school started, when the snake crawled out from under the prefabricated classroom and spat at her. 

“Fortunately (the venom) didn’t hit her eyes, it landed on her face from the nose down. We called the ambulance, but we were anxious, so one of the teachers took her to hospital. They said she was stable, but they did some blood tests. She was extremely traumatised and the other children were very scared,” said the teacher. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Some weeks ago, chaos erupted when a snake slithered into a room full of children through one of the holes in the floor. 
WATCH: Container classroom outcry: Parents oppose temporary solution

A snake catcher was brought in, but only found the reptile’s skin, which he identified as that of a ­Mozambican spitting cobra.

The floor, roof and walls of the prefabricated school buildings are falling apart. A Grade7 pupil was hospitalised after a pole fell on his head as the dilapidated building continued to crumble. 

Two weeks ago, a section of these classrooms was demolished to make way for new mobile classrooms, but these have yet to arrive. 

On Thursday more than 900 pupils were evacuated to a neighbouring school while they waited for their parents to fetch them. 

Myra Phillips, who is the guardian of her three nephews in Grades1 and 2, said she had received a call from the school telling her what had happened and asking her to fetch her nephews. “As I was approaching, I met other parents hurrying to the school, all worried sick about our kids.”

For the parents who had already arrived, worry turned to anger as they barricaded the road, burnt tyres and demanded the school be shut down until a proper structure could be built.

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said the situation had calmed but police were monitoring it. 

Philips said: “We wanted to stage a march on Monday, but late yesterday the municipality said we needed to wait 14 days for a permit. There is absolutely no sense of urgency. Our officials are totally indifferent. Some of them call this place ‘snake park’. I wonder if they think it’s still funny now.”

Snake expert Nick Evans said since the snake had spat, it was likely to be a Mozambican spitting cobra, which were very common and widespread in the province. 

He said these snakes spit as a defence mechanism. “They aim for the eyes to blind the person so they can escape. If they get you in the eye, it feels like someone’s put coarse beach sand mixed with soap and vinegar in your eye. If you don’t wash your eyes out and rub them, you could possibly have permanent damage,” said Evans. 

Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said they had called in specialists to tackle the issue of the snakes, and regretted the incident. 

“We wish (the pupil) a speedy recovery and we will continue to work towards ensuring they learn in a safe environment.” 

He said material for mobile classrooms was delivered yesterday and would be assembled over the weekend, ready for the children to continue classes on Monday. 
The Mercury