Pietermaritzburg-based NGO, the South African Minority Rights Equality Movement (Samrem), has laid a charge of corruption against former Msunduzi municipal manager Mxolisi Nkosi and another senior official at the troubled municipality.
The case was opened by the organisation’s secretary, Sher Singh, this week.

The second official, who is still employed in the municipality, cannot be named as attempts to reach her yesterday were unsuccessful.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In his affidavit, Singh said a forensic investigation conducted by a reputable audit firm in 2016 had discovered suspicious tender transactions valued at close to R1billion. 

He said the forensic report was delivered “under the door” of their offices by anonymous sources who trusted the organisation to act in the interests of the community.

Singh said it was disturbing that the municipality had failed to make the findings of the forensic report public, adding that its outcomes had been kept secret even from council. 

This is not the first time Samrem has opened a case against the council. In 2016 it reported suspected corruption amounting to R2bn, which resulted in a police raid on the council.  

The case is the latest controversy in the political drama that has been playing out in the municipality. 

There is a fierce battle between the municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe and his deputy city managers for control of the municipality.  

The managers have written to the premier’s office and the National Assembly demanding an investigation into the affairs of the municipality. Hadebe was recently embarrassed after he was allegedly caught in a recording discussing a “jobs for pals” scam. 

He narrowly survived being suspended at a special council meeting last week after the ANC allegedly came to his ­defence. 

Singh said the case they opened centred on the allegations that the municipality had violated its own supply chain management regulations   when it appointed companies to do work without following proper procedures.

Singh said that among many projects that were suspicious was an electrification project for which the municipality paid more than R20million, and another tender for an ageing infrastructure replacement project.

Evidence

“In both cases the municipality was invoiced, but there is no evidence that the work was ever done,” he said. 

Other allegations contained in the report allege that Nkosi authorised the appointment of a company for work valued at R132000 when the company did not submit a formal quotation, which is a requirement.  

Singh praised Hadebe, saying he was doing his best for the council. 

“It is very challenging for him to do his best when he is busy trying to clean up the problems of the past.” 

Nkosi said he had been made aware of the case, adding that Samrem was being used to divert attention away from the problems in the council.

“If they have facts they should put them on the table and we will defend them. I have always known Samrem to be a cabal with sinister motives,” he said.

SAPS spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed that a case of fraud had been opened at the Pietermaritzburg police station.