President Cyril Ramaphosa will be in the National Assembly today to answer oral questions from parliamentarians.
The state of affairs in the State Security Agency (SSA) and the SAPS’s troubled crime intelligence division, as well as the newly appointed special envoys on investment, are set to take centre stage.

Parliament spokesperson Moloto Mothapo said on Monday, holding question-and-­answer sessions was one way Parliament held the president and the executive to account.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“In terms of the rules of Parliament, the president is scheduled to appear once per quarter to answer questions in the National Assembly,” he said.

Mothapo said that up to six questions could be asked during the three-hour session.

Some of the questions include that from the ANC’s Adrian Williams, who wants to know what message the team of envoys will convey to potential investors.

DA leader Mmusi Maimane will ask Ramaphosa about ­details of assurances the ­envoys will give to potential investors, to ensure National Development targets are met.

Cope’s Deidre Carter wants to know if Ramaphosa will appoint a commission of inquiry to investigate the crime intelligence unit and SSA. In her question, Carter says there are allegations of malfeasance, corruption and abuse of state resources within the crime intelligence division and the SSA.

Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, Khusela Diko, said the president would update the nation on the country’s investment campaign to grow the economy, create jobs and reduce inequality.

“He will also cover the role of competition authorities in opening up markets and promoting small business.”

She said Ramaphosa would brief parliamentarians on measures being undertaken to restore the credibility of the country’s security agencies.

Last month, Ramaphosa appointed former finance minister Trevor Manuel, former finance deputy minister Mcebisi Jonas, executive chairperson of Afropulse Group Phumzile Langeni, and the chairman of Liberty Group and former chief executive of Standard Bank, Jacko Maree, as special envoys on investment.

Ramaphosa is embroiled in a court battle with the DA over the appointment of former SSA director-general Arthur Fraser as the commissioner of Correctional Services. 

The party launched a judicial review of Fraser’s appointment after Ramaphosa failed to answer their questions. Fraser has been accused of running a parallel intelligence network during his previous stint at the SSA. 
The Mercury