Durban - As several Chatsworth residents gathered at the ­funeral of Sadia Sukhraj, who was killed in a botched hijacking on Monday, Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda said a plan would be put in place for the deployment of crime intelligence personnel to the province’s worse-affected areas.
Kaunda said Durban was a hot spot for hijackings in the province, with Shallcross, where Sadia was shot, one of the worst areas.

He said the provincial government had concluded that areas with high crime rates needed more police visi­bility, and that there was a need to “ensure that on the ground the intelligence is gathered so that these criminal elements are dealt with”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Community mobilisation is the key intervention, because when the community is organised criminals will not have space to operate,” he 
said.

Police spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said that crime intelligence had experienced difficulties nationally as it had been without a head for the past seven years.

“When the national commissioner (General Khehla Sitole) was appointed (late last year) he made a commitment that within months he would appoint a head of crime intelligence.

“When Lieutenant-General Anthony Jacobs was appointed he hit the ground running, and now you can see the fruits of his labour, although he has been in the role for a short ­period of time,” said Naidoo.

He called on communities to provide police and crime ­intelligence with information on crime.

Naidoo also said he was still trying to verify allegations that police had fired stun grenades at angry community members who wanted justice for Sadia, and who had held a protest at the Chatsworth police station on Monday.

“When a gathering is unlawful the police have the right to act. They would tell people three or four times that they needed to disperse, and if they didn’t disperse they would use the necessary force for that situation,” he said.

Meanwhile, DA leader Mmusi Maimane, who was in Durban yesterday, called on Police Minister Bheki Cele to deploy more professional ­police officers to the province to reduce violent crime.

Maimane addressed the media on the sidelines of Sadia’s funeral in Chatsworth on Tuesday. 

Maimane described crime in the country as having reached intolerable levels, saying that “we should not as citizens of this country tolerate this”.

“It is about time that we build a police service that will ensure that our streets are much safer.”

He said he would tell Parliament that it was a disgrace that while the country was commemorating Child Protection Week a young girl’s life had been taken.

“We are grieving today, but we are also angry as a society. We are asking ourselves how many more children must die before we capacitate police stations like Chatsworth to be more effective at fighting crime,” Maimane said.
The Mercury