President Cyril Ramaphosa used Tuesday’s May Day rally in the Eastern Cape’s Nelson Mandela Bay to warn those who rejected the national ­minimum wage.
Addressing a workers’ day rally for the first time since taking over the ANC, Ramaphosa was accompanied by ­Cosatu president Sdumo Dlamini and SACP general secretary Blade Nzimande at Wolfson Stadium in Kwaza­khele, where the union federation held its main rally.

Unlike Zuma, who was booed and heckled by workers last year in Bloemfontein, Ramaphosa enjoyed a warm reception from unionists. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The National Minimum Wage Bill was backed by ­Cosatu, Fedusa (Federation of Unions of SA) and Nactu (National Council of Trade Unions) federations at the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac). 

Nedlac set the minimum wage at R3500 a month or R20 an hour. It was set to come into effect yesterday, but has been postponed.

The EFF, trade union federation Saftu and its biggest affiliate, Numsa, have been the major critics of the National Minimum Wage Bill and have rejected it, calling it an ­entrenchment of slave wages.

Last week, Saftu held a massive national strike action calling for a R12500 living wage instead, as demanded by the Marikana workers who were gunned down by police in 2012.

Ramaphosa said introducing a living wage in the short term would be disastrous for the economy as half the people would lose their jobs.

“Yes, we want workers to get that type of wage, but at the same time many workers in our country would have lost their jobs and many companies would have closed. Even those who employ domestic workers would have said they cannot afford to pay them,” Ramaphosa said. 

“We had to balance between losing millions of jobs and ­establishing a firm base and a foundation for us to continue waging the struggle for achieving a living wage. That is what we chose.”

Nzimande slammed those who rejected the minimum wage, calling them “infantile and ultra-left”.

With main rival Saftu also holding one of its rallies in the same metro, Dlamini took a swipe at the federation for ­accusing Cosatu of dying.

“Cosatu remains a formidable force representing the voiceless, the workers. No one will take that away. So I don’t mind about liars. I am not going to spend my breath trying to correct liars,” Dlamini said. 

Outspoken Numsa general secretary Irvin Jim bashed Cosatu’s leadership, accusing it of not representing workers affected by the current minimum wage as most of its affiliates were in a public sector dominated by professionals.

“Let us make it clear that we have no agenda to fight with workers in Cosatu,” Jim said, at the Vista Arena in Bloemfontein. “One of the things that Cosatu has lost is the industrial proletariat. All the workers who stand to benefit from the national minimum wage we are demanding, Fedusa cannot speak for them. Cosatu cannot speak for them,” Jim said.
The Mercury