Durban - President Cyril Rama­phosa has pledged to bring an end to political killings in KwaZulu-Natal and ensure that the killers are arrested.
Ramaphosa said on Monday that he had mandated security cluster ministers to provide him with a detailed report of what was happening in KZN in order to implement urgent ­interventions aimed at curbing the murders.

“We will not allow KZN to be the killing fields of South Africa. I said to comrade Bheki Cele, police minister, I want him and the ministers of justice, defence and state security to meet next week (on Monday) and by the end of the week, I want a report of who is killing people,” Ramaphosa said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He was speaking at the home of slain ANC activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu at KwaPata in 
Pietermaritzburg yesterday. Mchunu was shot dead in his driveway on Friday evening.

Mchunu had led several marches demanding that the Moses Mabhida regional conference be postponed, that the ANC regional executive committee be disbanded and that alleged corruption in municipalities under uMgungundlovu District, including Msunduzi, be probed.

Addressing concerned ANC members outside the Mchunu home following a meeting with the family, Ramaphosa told them the killers were anti- ANC, but called for calm. 

“Mchunu worked for unity of the ANC, these killers are against unity and peace, we cannot allow them to divide us. What we don’t want is for some among us to be against unity, the ANC here must be strengthened. Comrade Mchunu’s blood must unite us,” Ramaphosa said.

He also assured the family and party members that the killers would be found and ­arrested. He pleaded with ANC members to practise tolerance despite different political opinions and to work for the unity of the ANC.

“Let us be peaceful, disciplined, make sure that we take our comrade to his last resting place in dignity, let us support the family, but I am telling you, we will get the truth, we will get to the bottom of this,” he added.

Despite asking party members to do away with factionalism and adopt the unity ­approach assumed by the party after its elective conference, factional divisions were highlighted when party members booed at the mention of ­deputy secretary-general Jessie 
Duarte’s name. 

Reports also suggested that prominent ANC leaders, including the co-ordinator of the provincial task team, Sihle Zikalala, were barred from Mchunu’s home by angry ANC activists. Ramaphosa was accompanied by national chairperson Gwede Mantashe and provincial task team convener Mike Mabuyakhulu.

Political analyst Thabani Khumalo said Ramaphosa’s choices of who travelled with him across the province were not evidence of unity, rather he was a victim of deep-rooted factionalism in KZN.

“The divisions are distinct, Zikalala cannot go to the other side, Mabuyakhulu cannot go to the other side. 

“The biggest mistake by the national leadership was to use factions to solve a problem that was created by factions,” he said.

Khumalo said that the national leadership was supposed to disband the provincial structure and form a neutral structure that was not aligned with either faction.

“As long as these two factions exist, the playing field will not be levelled. It is organised chaos,” he said.

Zikalala could not be reached for comment last night.
The Mercury