Durban - Are you one of the South African soccer fans and holidaymakers who were issued with visas after days of uncertainty? Now that you have permission to travel to the Ukraine, we have compiled a list of interesting facts about the European country.

Did you know?AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

1. Second only to Russia, Ukraine is the second-largest of Europe’s 43 countries at 603,628 square kilometres, stretching from Russia in the east to Poland in the west. 

2. Ukraine has seven World Heritage Sites:


Ancient City of Tauric Chersonese and its Chora (2013)Kiev: Saint-Sophia Cathedral and Related Monastic Buildings, Kiev-Pechersk Lavra (1990)L’viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre (1998)Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans (2011)Struve Geodetic Arc (2005)Wooden Tserkvas of the Carpathian Region in Poland and Ukraine (2013)Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and the Ancient Beech Forests of Germany (2007)



3. The World Health Organisation (WHO) ranks Ukraine sixth in the world for alcohol consumption, with 13.9 litres consumed per capita per year. 
Also read: Toxic alcohol kills six at party in Ukraine

4. Ukraine is at the heart of Europe. Within Ukraine is the geographical centre of Europe. A number of locations lay claim to the title and it depends on how you measure Europe, but the small town of Rakhiv in western Ukraine is one such place.

5.  It is no longer referred to as 'The Ukraine' since the country gained independence in 1993. The Ukranian government requested that the country be called just Ukraine.

6. The Arsenalna station on Kiev’s Sviatoshynsko-Brovarska line is the world’s deepest at 105.5 metres below ground.

 



7. Chernobyl is the site of the world’s worst nuclear power plant disaster in 1986. There are a number of abandoned ghost towns that draw interest from all over the world.

8. The city of Lviv claims to have the most cafes in the world per capita.

9. Ukraine has about five ski resorts, including Bukovel in the Carpathian mountains, with 55km of slopes and 15 lifts. 

 



10. Ukraine's coastline, The Black Sea, is popular with holidaymakers because the massive lake's water level never changes.