Durban - KwaZulu-Natal DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango has tabled a motion before the provincial legislature to have former president Jacob Zuma barred from addressing taxpayer-funded government events.
Mncwango said he had tabled the motion during last Thursday’s sitting of the legislature. “In my motion I said the legislature must take a decision not to allow Zuma to address government events.”

He recently addressed a faith symposium in Jozini where MPL Vusi Dube is the chairperson of the Public Participation and Interfaith committee and Dube invited Zuma to be the guest speaker, apparently without engaging with fellow committee members and the legislature. “In what capacity was Zuma invited?” Mncwango asked. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He alleged there was a group of leaders in the province, led by Dube and ANC  provincial co-ordinator Sihle Zikalala, who were trying to create a rivalry between Ramaphosa and Zuma.

Zikalala hit back, saying the DA leader was attempting to create divisions out of something that didn’t exist. 

“That division is not going to assist him and it is a lie and there is no competition. We know that our president is Cyril Ramaphosa and we don’t have any confusion over that,” Zikalala said.

Bheki Ntuli, eThekwini regional secretary, also rubbished Mncwango’s claims saying the DA was running short of political programmes to help the province and the country move forward.

“They fought with former president Zuma while he was in office he’s no longer in office now so they must talk of things that they will assist to take the country forward. Talking about Nxamalala is a waste of time.

“Former president Zuma’s salary will be paid for by the state and he has state paid staff because if you’re a former president you’re still looked after by the state so why would they say he shouldn’t address state events?” Ntuli asked.

Mncwango said Zikalala’s faction wanted Zuma to remain relevant at all costs. 

“They can make him relevant within the ANC but don’t use public funds to make him relevant.”
The Mercury