Durban - The Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) has expressed its shock following the arrests of a KwaZulu-Natal mayor and councillor, allegedly involved in an assassination plot. On Thursday morning details emerged of a plot to murder the speaker of the Endumeni Municipality. A third person, believed to be a hitman, was also nabbed. The trio face charges of conspiracy to commit murder. 

Read: KZN mayor arrested for 'assassination plot' against SpeakerAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is with shock and deep disappointment that the IFP has received the news that Mayor Mbatha of an IFP-led Endumeni Municipality was arrested on allegations of attempting to assassinate the Speaker of the same Municipality, who is also an IFP leader herself," IFP Deputy National Spokesperson, Joshua Mazibuko, said 

“As a matter of principle, we to categorically state that as the IFP, we abhor any act of using violence to resolve whatever issues the people may have," he added. 

Mazibuko said the IFP is fully aware that allegations were levelled and they cannot pass judgement, however, it was worrisome. 

"What worries the IFP more is the fact that these allegations implicate a leader who is supposed to be exemplary. As a party we view this in a very serious light. Consequently, as the IFP, we have begun our internal processes towards understanding what happened with a view to taking appropriate steps. We however wish to applaud the police for acting swiftly to prevent what may have been yet another politically-motivated murder. We also urge all law-enforcement agencies to quickly bring this matter to its conclusion for the sake of all involved and also for the sake of our country," he said. 

KZN Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nomusa Dube-Ncube said called the matter "disturbing".
"We need to allow the law to take its course. We urge the law enforcement agencies to expedite this case and we urge the community of Endumeni to remain calm while the due process is taking place," she said. 

Dube-Ncube said in the meantime, they will be following all developments intently. 
The Mercury