Durban - KwaZulu-Natal travellers will now be able to fly directly from Durban to London's Heathrow Airport from October this year. The joint announcement was made in Durban morning by the KZN MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Sihle Zikalala and British Airways at a breakfast ahead of Africa’s Tourism Indaba, which officially opens this week. 

The new direct airline service between the two cities will commence on October 29, with three direct flights a week from Heathrow to the King Shaka International Airport.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“As of Wednesday, the public can book their flight between London and Durban on the 214 passenger aircraft. The investment and trade opportunities presented by this direct flight between Durban and London will undoubtedly add huge value to our economy,” Zikalala said.

He added that the introduction of the British Airways flight augured well for KwaZulu-Natal’s Route Development Strategy which aims to provide a mechanism for attracting and supporting new and direct air services routes for King Shaka International Airport.

“This new route adds to our growing number of international flights, amongst which can be counted flights connecting us to key world’s destinations such as the Gulf region, the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent, North Asia, Australia as well as Beijing, Shanghai, Tokyo and Seoul through the hub in Abu Dhabi,” Zikalala said.

British Airway Chairman and CEO, Alex Cruz, expressed confidence that the flight would lead to an improvement in the province’s tourism fortunes.

“It is a gateway to many nature reserves, parks and historic sites, and has a thriving food, drink and arts scene; defining the city as a must visit for culture and adventure,” Cruz said.

Approximately 10 000 passengers who currently fly indirectly between Durban and London via Johannesburg will now fly directly to Durban. This will drastically reduce travel times and costs. 

Over the last 7 years, King Shaka International Airport has been able to build its passengers volumes to the point where it now facilitates the movement of some 5.5 million passengers per annum.
The Mercury