Durban - Fearing for the safety of its employees, the Auditor-General’s office has withdrawn its audit team from the eThekwini Municipality after the auditors received threats.
The AG’s office is a chapter 9 institution that provides critical oversight on various spheres of government.

On Monday, the AG’s KwaZulu-Natal office wrote to the city administration informing it of its unprecedented decision to withdraw the auditors with immediate effect.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Mercury understands that some of the auditors received threatening phone calls from unknown ­people after they asked for some supply chain management documents.

This comes after the Auditor-General revealed that his audit teams were working under increasingly hostile environments. He said that at some municipalities there was increased contestation of audit findings and push-backs where audit processes and motives were questioned.

In the letter, seen by The Mercury, Ntomb’futhi Mhlongo, the business executive at the AG’s office in Pietermaritzburg, writes: “Please be advised that the audit team has been removed from the eThekwini audit with immediate effect as the safety of the team has been compromised.”

Mhlongo further wrote: “In the interim, kindly inform the municipal accounts committee and audit committee of the matter as discussed, and note that the AGSA will not be in a ­position to attend any further meetings until this matter is resolved.”

Phillip Sithole, the deputy city manager, confirmed receipt of the AG’s letter, saying the city took the matter very seriously and had thus acted swiftly by devising a security plan. He said the matter was also being investigated by the police.

Sithole, who was acting city manager at the time, had convened an emergency meeting of the two parties on Wednesday. 

“At the meeting they did not reveal much about the threats because of the sensitivity of the matter. It was agreed that Dumisani Bhengu, the head of security at the city, would meet with the head of security at the AG’s office and map the way forward.”

Sithole added that city manager Sipho Nzuza had to cut short an overseas trip in order to attend to the matter. Nzuza yesterday held another meeting with the AG’s office, where the threats were further discussed.

“He (Nzuza) told me that in the meeting he promised them that he was going to deal with the issue of security. They agreed that the AG must come back as soon as the municipality has addressed those issues,” Sithole said. He said the issue of whether the threats came from within the municipality was being investigated by police.

Sithole said this was a first for eThekwini.

The chairperson of Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts, Vincent Smith, said he would be personally asking the AG for more information on this matter, adding that “Parliament does not have the luxury of not doing anything” in such situations.

“For me, the biggest threat to our democracy is financial mismanagement and corruption, because those things can lead to an uprising. Therefore any attempt to impede the work of the Auditor-General constitutes a threat to democracy,” Smith said.

Political commentator Bukani Mngoma said threats should be taken very seriously as they raised suspicions about attempts to cover up wrongdoing. “Also, the AG is part of the chapter 9 institutions created to fortify democracy. So any threat to the AG’s staff is similar to threatening investigators from the Public Protector’s Office, for example.”

Mngoma said it was reasonable to assume that the threats came from within the municipality. 

“I don’t think such a threat would come from an outside party. How would any outsider have known that these were the individuals doing the audit? One hopes there will be some sort of intervention.”

The KwaZulu-Natal Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs Department said it was not aware of the withdrawal of the AG audit team

At the time of writing the AG’s office had not responded to questions from The Mercury.
The Mercury