Durban - Disgruntled members of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal say they have lost confidence in their leader, Mike Mabuyakhulu, and want the provincial task team (PTT), which he leads, replaced with a team deployed from the national office.
The ANC members, who are aligned to President Cyril Ramaphosa, claim that Mabuyakhulu and MPL Nhlakanipho Ntombela have failed to represent their faction adequately in negotiating unity with their opponents led by Economic Development MEC Sihle Zikalala. 

Mabuyakhulu said the aggrieved faction had not approached him with their concerns. He said the aim of the PTT was to rise above the challenges of the party, which had started before the 2015 provincial conference.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He also said he and convener Zikalala represented all the members of the ANC, instead of just a particular faction. 

“We would have been much happier had we known the specifics of the concerns and to see if those concerns could be addressed for all members of the ANC. But not on the basis that we should be perpetuating the status quo that has brought us to where we are now,” he said.

Mabuyakhulu said he was prepared to step down if the NEC asked him to do so.

“We would be willing to stand aside and allow other comrades to pursue the inclusion agenda of building unity and the agenda of the ANC processes,” he said.

When asked if he was comfortable with the provincial conference being held this month, he said “there is a ­decision that had been taken by the organisation and, as the convener of the provincial task team, I am part of that ­decision”.

Hundreds of people packed a conference hall at the Margate Hotel yesterday to express their opposition to the provincial conference expected to be held later this month. 

They arrived from the divided regions of the lower South Coast, Moses Mabhida, Harry Gwala, Abaqulusi and eThekwini. 

Sifiso Dlamini from eThekwini said supporters of the Ramaphosa faction were being bullied at branch level whenever they demanded the correct processes of preparing for conference to be followed. 

They were angry that the national working committee (NWC), together with the PTT, had gone against them by deciding that the provincial conference should be held this month. They wanted the event to be held after next year’s general elections as they claim that gatekeeping and irregularities at branch level have not been resolved. 

“It means that there is a well-orchestrated plan,” said Dlamini, adding that Mabuya­khulu was meant to represent them with regards to the challenges they are facing. 

“We have lost confidence in the so called PIC/PTT because they have not done the things they have been mandated to do by the NEC,” he said.

The aggrieved faction said that the playing field for a free and fair provincial conference was not level for the election of new leaders. 

Dlamini said agreements reached at the provincial level did not reflect at branch level. 

Andile Buwa said branches remained divided while the NWC was talking about readiness for the conference. 

A PTT member of Ramaphosa’s faction, Peggy Nkonyeni, said at the weekend that unity negotiations were running smoothly with a unity committee led by Premier Willies Mchunu and Mabuyakhulu engaging both factions. 
The Mercury