Durban - Garbage is once again piling up on the streets of uMlazi and other townships as some contractors responsible for refuse collection downed tools last week over non-payment.
But as the garbage continued to pile up, the city said it was “unaware of any service disruptions due to a strike”.

Various sources and a contractor, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of being victimised by the city, said subcontractors in Durban townships had on Tuesday last week stopped collecting refuse as they had not received payments for work done in April.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We have decided that we are not touching anything until we receive those SMSes (notifications) confirming that the funds have been deposited,” said the contractor.

This is the second time this year that the contractors stopped collecting waste in townships. The first incident was reported in January after angry subcontractors went on a rampage, strewing rubbish all over uMlazi.

Sources with information on the situation said a flawed contract awarded to four main contractors was at the centre of the disruptions.

The Mercury understands disagreements over the contract also caused tensions at Durban Solid Waste (DSW), leading to head of the department Raymond Rampersad going on leave for three months and Noluthando Magewu being appointed the acting head.

It is understood that Ram-
persad is one of the officials who raised concerns about the legality of the contract.

The contract was awarded to four main contractors who then subcontracted close to 200 subcontractors, who are each paid R25 000 monthly. 

Some of the subcontractors were allegedly imposed on the contractors as part of a large patronage network, claimed one source.

However, the bone of contention has been the money claimed by the main contractors for collecting refuse at the many illegal dumping sites in townships.

While the contract had stipulated the amount to be claimed for a cubic metre of waste, it did not put any cap on the total amount that can be claimed. This is the loophole that has allegedly been exploited by some of the contractors.

Some invoices received by the city were said to be too high, leading to the problems in January.

So high were the bills that the R45 million budget that had been allocated to the programme over the period of six months was depleted in just two months.

The Mercury yesterday asked the municipality about the availability of the budget to pay the contractors. 

In response, eThekwini spokesperson Mandla Nsele said: “Please note that the city pays for the services rendered by contractors and/or service providers daily, provided that the work delivered is of acceptable standard as per the signed contract, and the information contained in the invoice is accurate, such as the account number and the amount due to the contractor and/or service provider.” 

DA councillor Nomfundo Khuboni of uMlazi confirmed that waste had been piling up at the township since last week. She had written to the council but had not received any information, she said.

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham yesterday wrote to Phil Mashoko, the deputy city manager for trading services, which incorporates DSW. 

She asked that the matter be probed. Graham has in the past been following up on the developments at DSW and said yesterday that the disruption to waste collection was not acceptable and should be probed.

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi also confirmed that he had received complaints of refuse not being collected. 

“I have just spoken to someone at a B&B in uMlazi who tells me that, as neighbours, they have had to collect money and hire a bakkie to take the refuse away. 

“Surely it is about time that the city manager intervenes and does something about this,” he said.

Nkosi said he wanted the issue to be investigated, saying that those responsible “for
the mess” should face consequences.

“It is very concerning that the city is very quick to pay when funds are due to politically connected individuals and companies, but when these are for critical services, the process is slow.

“We need to get to the bottom of this. People, especially children, are being subjected to hazardous conditions,” he said.
Share your thoughts on this matter by Tweeting @TheMercurySA or commenting on our Facebook page. 
The Mercury