Parliament has raised concern over the approval of the Department of Water and Sanitation’s 2018/19 budget after it had previously failed to meet its targets, but overspent its budget.
Parliament’s portfolio committee on water and sanitation slammed the department, which appeared before the committee Wednesday to present its strategic plan, budget vote and annual performance plan for the 2018/19 financial year. 

Acting chairperson of the committee Patrick Chauke said: “Those who mismanaged the previous budget are the same ones who will manage the budget again. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We need to get a serious assurance from the department We will not allow a situation where the department only reaches 28% of its target but the entire budget of the department is finished. 

“In this current budget, the minister must assure us that the drivers of the budget are credible drivers to implement the incoming budget,” said Chauke. 

The department in the past financial year had overspent its R14billion budget by R2bn under previous minister Nomvula Mokonyane.

She is now the communications minister. 

The department is reportedly owed R11bn by municipalities and water boards with the debt having risen by R1.3bn between April 1, 2017, and January 31 this year. 

The current Water and Sanitation Minister Gugile Nkwinti has assured Parliament that the department, under his administration, would turn things around.

“Our outcomes on the budget are very specific. The outcomes outline what we will spend the money on and the output. We as the department have to do all we can to sweep the floor of all the debt, and try to move forward and come up with something that is credible and meet the requirements of the mandate of the 
department. 

“In order for that to happen, we need to be firm and not dwell in the past,” said 
Nkwinti. 

He inherited a department in financial and administrative shambles. 

It was reported earlier this year that the multinational software giant SAP was double-billing the department by hundreds of millions of rand.

The vanity project, signed by the department under Mokonyane in 2016, saw the state buying R950million in “unlimited” SAP software licences for itself, all nine water boards and the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority.

The irregularities, overspending, dodgy contracts and maladministration at the department had also led to Parliament launching a full-blown inquiry.

Chauke said the committee and Parliament’s Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) have finalized the terms of reference for their full-scale inquiry. 
The Mercury