Durban - ANC MP Mduduzi Manana could still be hauled before the courts to face allegations of assault.
The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) was still awaiting a report from the police before making a final decision on whether to drop the charges against Manana. 

Manana’s former domestic worker, Christine Wiro, opened cases of common assault and crimen injuria over the last weekend. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It emerged that Manana allegedly pushed the 53-year-old Wiro down the stairs during a heated argument.

Wiro then withdrew the charges after the 34-year-old Manana allegedly offered her R100000. 

Phindi Louw-Mjonondwane, spokesperson for the NPA, said on Thursday that police were directed to conduct further investigations after indicating they intended to drop the case. “The standard procedure is that when a complainant wants to withdraw a ­matter, the police file a withdrawal statement and bring the docket to the NPA for a decision,” Louw-Mjonondwane said. 

“In this one, the NPA has not made its decision as yet. It has instructed the police to conduct further investigations and bring the docket back to the NPA.

“The docket is with the police for further investigation. When they’ve completed those investigations they’ll bring it to the NPA for a decision. At this point there’s no decision from the NPA.”

Gauteng police spokesperson Brigadier Mathapelo Peters confirmed the probe was ongoing.

“The docket was sent back (to us) with an instruction to investigate further,” she said yesterday. 

Last year Manana assaulted two women at a club in Fourways. The Randburg Magistrate’s Court sentenced him to one year in jail or a fine of R100000.

Thandi Nontenja, secretary general of the UDM Women’s Organisation, applauded the NPA for referring the docket to the police. 

“We commend the NPA for not dropping the charges against Manana and we hope that justice will run its course. The magistrate presiding over this matter, should throw the book at him,” she said. 

PAC spokesperson Kenneth Mokgatlhe said: “We also call upon the police to continue with the case despite the victim dropping that case because it is a known fact that victims are usually bribed or intimidated to stop pursuing cases of that nature.” 

Manana’s latest debacle has revived calls for the ANC to recall him from Parliament. 

Mlondi Mkhize, the ANCYL’s spokesperson, said Manana should do the “honourable” thing and resign from his position as an ANC MP. 
The Mercury