Durban - Endumeni Municipality mayor and IFP member Siboniso Mbatha has been arrested for allegedly plotting to kill council Speaker Bongiwe Mbatha-Makhathini.
Among those arrested with Mbatha, 31, are an IFP politician and an alleged hitman.

The Hawks swooped on Mbatha’s Dundee home, and the homes of uMtshezi Municipality IFP councillor Mthembeni Majola, 38, and the alleged hitman, Xolani Mkhwanazi, 36.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The three appeared in the Estcourt Magistrate’s Court yesterday, facing charges of conspiracy to commit murder.

KwaZulu-Natal Hawks spokesperson Simphiwe Mhlongo said the accused would remain behind bars until their next court appearance on May 31.

Mbatha took over the mayoral chain after his party unseated the ANC during the 2016 local government elections.

Mhlongo said the trio had
allegedly plotted to kill Mbatha-
Makhathini, who is alleged to be “an obstacle in the awarding of a tender”.

“It is understood the Speaker allegedly suspected undue influence and possible corruption in the tender-awarding process,” Mhlongo said.

A councillor, who asked not to be named, said the plot against Mbatha-Makhathini was allegedly linked to the murder of her bodyguard on February 25.

Yesterday, Mbatha-Makhathini said that since early last year she had been receiving death threats, which she reported to the police and the council.

“I am waiting for a briefing from the police. I was attacked on February 25, where my bodyguard was shot in my house and later died,” she said.

She said the attack on her house happened in the early hours of the morning, a day after she 
had alerted the police about a 
suspicious-looking car which 
had been spotted driving in 
her road for a week.

“I was asleep (on February 25)
when I was awakened by the sound of a gunshot. When I peeped through the window, I saw my
bodyguard lying in a pool of blood.

“Before he died he told us that a man had tried to force his way into my house before he shot him,” Mbatha-Makhathini said.

She said that after the murder of her bodyguard, the police conducted a security analysis on her before upgrading her security.

Mbatha-Makhathini said she suspected the attempt on her life was linked to her stance against corruption in the municipality.

 But she declined to reveal details as the provincial Department Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) was conducting an investigation “under section 106”.

“Cogta informed us about the investigation in November,” she said.   

Provincial IFP spokesperson Joshua Mazibuko expressed shock at the arrest and murder plot.

“What worries the IFP is the fact that these allegations implicate a leader who is supposed to be exemplary. 

“As a party, we view this in a very serious light.

“As the IFP, we have begun our internal processes towards understanding what happened with a view to taking appropriate steps,” Mazibuko said.

Cogta MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube appealed to law enforcement agencies to expedite the case.

“We urge the community of Endumeni to remain calm while due process is taking place,” added Dube-Ncube.

KwaZulu-Natal Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda commended the Hawks for their fight against political killings in the province.

“The arrest of a mayor will send a strong message that the law will be applied without fear or favour. Politicians and public representatives who are plotting to eliminate their colleagues must rot in jail,” Kaunda said.
The Mercury