Durban - Violent protests by community members in Umlalazi, Eshowe, has left a trail of destruction - with damages expected to run into millions of rand.
A farmhouse and car were set alight and farm equipment was also damaged in protests that started on Sunday afternoon.

The latest protests come after community members went on the rampage in March and burnt hectares of sugar cane on a farm owned by Dr Fikile Qoboshiyane. A farmhouse and other buildings on the property were also burnt. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The protests had been sparked by the death of a local man, Siphamandla Xulu, who had been shot and killed, allegedly by a security guard.  

Yesterday, when The Mercury visited the area, the R66 from Eshowe had been blocked with burning debris and protesters had gathered to hold a meeting.

Eshowe Farmers Association leader Craig Hanbury King said yesterday that he estimated that the damage would cost R2 million to R3m.

“The damage was to a house, some items in the house and farm equipment,” he said.

He said the protests were due to the community being angry about the continued presence of the V1 security company in the area, and they had demanded that the guards leave. 

The company has been a target of the community’s anger after one of its guards allegedly shot Xulu during an altercation in March. 

Xulu had been found fishing illegally at a dam on a farm, which led to the guard confronting him.

The guard has been arrested in connection with the incident, and his case is pending.

Hanbury King said the association had met with the community.

“We believe that a satisfactory agreement has been reached,” he said.

Security company V1’s senior manager, Nathaniel Zwane, said: “I have met with the community (yesterday). I have been told that I should move my guards out of the farms, and that is what I have done,” said Zwane.

Zwane said he believed there was an ulterior motive behind the protest. 

“Someone just wants to remove my security company from this area. But if this was just about my company, why did they burn and loot the farmhouse, instead of marching to my offices?” 

Zwane questioned why the community expected his company to compensate the family of the man who died. 

“The person who shot the (man) is in custody; we handed him over to the police. We ­contributed to the funeral, we cannot compensate the family,” he said. 

Ward councillor Mbongiseni Dludla said the community was adamant the security company should leave the area. 

“The family has approached me to ask what was happening, because ever since the funeral, the company has not spoken to the family about how they will compensate them for what happened,” he said.

Police spokesperson Mbongeni Mdlalose said several cases were being investigated in connection with the protests, but no arrests had been made.
The Mercury