Athletics SA (ASA) has thrown its support behind golden girl Caster Semenya to fight proposed regulations that will force women athletes with high levels of testosterone to reduce them through medication.
The athletics governing body introduced the new rules governing the eligibility of female athletes with Difference of Sexual ­Differences (DSDs).

ASA threatened to take the IAAF to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) if it did not withdraw the amended regulations.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“As a member federation, we will engage the IAAF as our mother body, and if they do not change their minds on this new rule after this engagement, we will proceed to CAS for further assistance on the matter,” ASA said in a statement issued.

The new rule will require women with DSDs to reduce their blood testosterone level to below five nanomoles per litre for a continuous period of at least six months.

The IAAF said research had shown that women competing with a level above the threshold were ­either DSD athletes, doped athletes or athletes with adrenal or ovarian tumours.

For now, the regulations are limited to athletes that compete in events ranging from the 400m to the 1500m. Semenya is a gold medal ­winner in both 800m and 1500m.

The new regulations come into effect from November 2018 and female athletes with DSDs would have to use the contraceptive pill to reduce their testosterone below the required levels.

ASA said it had consulted widely on the matter with role-players which included the minister of sport and recreation, the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (Sascoc), various expert institutions and other relevant organisations and individuals.

“Based on this consultation, we have now taken a decision that we will challenge the IAAF on these new regulations as we have found them to be skewed,” it said.

ASA is the second national ­athletics federation to call for a review of the new rules.

Athletics Canada released a statement on Tuesday saying it would hold discussions with government officials and other ­national sports organisations, but believed the “IAAF eligibility ruling requires rigorous review”.

However, the European Athletics Council welcomed the IAAF regulations, which it said  would  “preserve fair and meaningful competition in the female classification”.
The Mercury