Disgruntled Transnet workers shut down operations in some sections of Durban Harbour Tuesday, demanding the end of outsourcing to labour brokers.
One of the protesters, who asked not to be named, said they wanted to be employed directly by Transnet instead of the various labour brokers providing staff to the parastatal. 

She said they did not have benefits and if anyone complained, they were dismissed. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nokuzola Nkowane, acting port manager, said while workers embarked on “unprotected industrial action” and blocked the Point Precinct entrances to the port of Durban, this did not have an impact on Transnet National Ports Authority’s marine operations.

“However Transnet Port Terminals’ operations within the Point Precinct were
affected.

“No violence has been reported and the situation remains under control with SAPS on site monitoring activity,” she said. 

Another worker said they had elected a group to represent them in talks with Transnet at a meeting called when the protest started. 

“We told them to tell Transnet about the difficult conditions we work under.

“These labour brokers don’t care about our health and safety. It’s like our lives are worth less than those of permanent employees,” he said. 

Cosatu provincial secretary Edwin Mkhize said while they were aware of the protest action, they were yet to receive a report from their affiliate - the SA Transport and Allied Workers Union - which they had deployed to look into the matter. 

But generally, the union federation had long since been campaigning for a ban on labour brokers.

“It is a fallacy that labour brokers create employment; companies create employment.

“As for it being about
administration, what are human resource departments at companies for? Labour brokering is daylight robbery,” said Mkhize. 

August Mbhele, of the SA Federation of Trade Unions, echoed this, saying labour brokers were “selling people”.

“What work do they do? All they are there for is to pay people, but they do this after they take a huge chunk of the money paid by the employer.

“They just earn money off the backs of workers.”

Nkowane said Transnet was engaging with the outsourced services provider regarding the workers’ grievances in an effort to resolve the matter.

While entrances to the port had since been cleared, they would monitor the situation closely.
The Mercury