A civic organisation has threatened to take legal action against the Department of Education if it continues to “endanger” hundreds of children by failing to either refurbish, or relocate them from, dilapidated, snake-infested school.
Mzwakhe Sithebe, convener of the Endumeni Civic Association, said only six of the almost 900 Grade 1 to 7 pupils enrolled at the Dundee Junior Secondary School attended last week's classes, as other parents feared for their children's safety on the premises. 

A  teacher who spoke on condition of anonymity, as he was not allowed to speak to the media, said only five of the 21 classrooms were permanent brick structures, dating back to when the school was established in the CBD of the northern KwaZulu-Natal town in 1920. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

There were eight prefabricated classrooms, which were made of hazardous asbestos, and the remaining were temporary mobile classrooms. 

“Some of the classrooms sit on stilts which are about 1m to 1.5m above the ground. The floors inside the classrooms have gaping holes, which children could easily fall through,” said the teacher. 

Where there are not holes, the floors are worn or patched so many times that walking around the classrooms is dangerous. A teacher has fallen through the floor and a snake slipped through a hole into a classroom full of children, said the teacher. 

“When a professional snake expert came in to have a look, he found the skin of a snake which was 1.8m long. He said it was the skin of a spitting cobra. The classrooms are not suitable for human habitation, let alone teaching and learning. It's extremely dangerous for the children and the teachers,” said the teacher.  

The teachers' toilet had partially collapsed and can only be used in full view of anyone outside. The dilapidation, said the teacher, is not only caused by the elements and wear and tear over the years, but also because these temporary structures were never meant to be used for as long as they had.

“There is only so much repairing and patching up that can be done. This school is a disaster waiting to happen. We are talking of a situation that may cost a child's life. As teachers, we are not safe either."

The situation has become so dire that parents are forced to choose between their children's education and keeping them out of harm's way.

Protested

Last week parents protested outside the school over the squalor they were forced to send their kids into every day, as all nearby schools were full. 

After their action, a meeting was called on Sunday, but Sithebe said department officials could not give them a straight answer on the reasons for delays or the way forward. 

“We suggested alternative locations because that school is far too risky. If nothing is done, we are prepared to take them to court for not providing a safe environment,” he said. 

However, department spokesperson Sicelo Khuzwayo said this school has been prioritised for refurbishment. 

He said an infrastructure team from the province and district would visit the school this week to conduct the assessment. He refuted claims that nothing was being done, saying it was in the department's interest to rectify the situation as soon as possible. 

“We can't delay something that is our responsibility. The community can be assured that we are working very hard, and through the right channels, to ensure that in not so distant future, they will be happy with the school they are sending their children to.” 
The Mercury