The Msunduzi Municipality councillor who alleges that he was attacked by a mob at his home last week has warned “the mob” to stay away from his family or he will be forced “to roll up his sleeves and act like a man”.
A group had marched to Nkosinathi Gambu’s home, near Edendale, on Thursday to demand an explanation after a scheduled community meeting was cancelled at the 11th hour.

Instead, they clashed with the councillor’s supporters outside his house. One person was shot in the leg, and a car is said to have been damaged.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

A community member, who asked not to be named, said the meeting was called to discuss delays in a housing project. 

Gambu said he had not called the meeting and was not responsible for its cancellation. He described the attack on him and his family as politically motivated. 

“The people at that meeting are led by a former councillor. I passed them on the way, as I rushed to my house to protect my family. And some of those people were carrying guns.

“The people who supported me also rushed to protect me. They parked their cars. About eight of them, outside my house. Those people also had guns,” he said. 

He said the disgruntled group approached his house and threatened to damage the windows of the cars, when the owners ran outside to protect their vehicles.

“A fight broke out between the two groups. I then heard the sound of gunshots. I’m not sure how many times the gun was fired or who shot whom, as I was in my yard and it was already getting dark.”

Gambu said this was not the first time he had come under attack. “Last month I attended a community meeting, and while I was addressing that meeting, I was hit with a bottle in the eye. I paid R14000 for medical care.” 

And in 2016 he was shot at eight times while he was at his home

He found it strange that people were using a 10-year-old housing project to attack him. 

“I have been in office for two years and have injected ­energy into this project.” 

A case of attempted murder had been opened, police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said.
The Mercury