Durban - As Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane delivers his budget speech at the provincial legislature Thursday, at least one teachers’ union is planning to picket outside the precinct to highlight the plight of Grade R teachers who have not received their salaries.
The teachers should have been paid their salaries on Monday.

The department was already facing off with the unions after it failed to pay increases to Grade R teachers that were due in the 2017-18 ­financial year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Last week, the SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) ordered the department to ­resolve the issue by today or face a general strike. 

The National Teachers Union (Natu) has previously raised concerns with the state of the department and called on Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga to place it under administration.

One of the affected teachers said this was the first time they had not been paid. 

“Normally we get promises that we will get salary increases, but those never materialise. The last time we had an ­increase was in 2011.”

“Right now the situation is difficult, we are being pursued by creditors and we cannot meet our  obligations,” she said. 

Natu deputy president Allen Thompson said:  “We are going to Pietermaritzburg to picket outside the legislature to bring the plight of these teachers to the attention of the other members of the legislature.

“We want the national government to take over the running of the department. There are many issues with that department, including maladministration and issues of corruption.

He said the situation in schools was dire. 

“There are teachers who have not received their salaries this year.”

Sadtu provincial secretary Nomarashiya Caluza said they were shocked by the failure of the department to pay many Grade R practitioners. 

“This is nothing else but symptoms of a collapsing ­department. By doing this, the employer has shown to the public how uncaring they are.  

“The department cannot blame schools because our principals signed and submitted the documents for renewal of contracts on time. 

“they must pay with immediate effect - our call is for them to make sure that employees get their monies on Thursday (today),” she said.

Department spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said they were busy resolving the issue of non-payment. 

“We value the teachers and the work they do for our children.”
The Mercury