Durban - Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane is worried about the performance of progressed pupils in Grade 12 this year, saying many had performed below expectations during the first term assessments in March.
Unconfirmed figures supplied by the department show that there are about 34000 progressed pupils. 

This figure has increased by almost 9000 from the 25000 progressed pupils who wrote the Grade 12 exams last year. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

About 147 000 pupils in total are expected to sit for Grade 12 exams, which means that progressed pupils would make up 23% of the province’s Grade 12 pupils. 

However, these figures are subject to change as ongoing verification processes are being carried out by the department.

Speaking recently, Dlungwane said while he was happy with the general results from Grade 12 assessments, which showed improvement, he was concerned with how the progressed ­pupils had fared.

“They are not performing at the level that we are expecting. We will be introducing more measures to support them,” he said. 

Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga has previously said she was pleased with how progressed pupils perform in their final exams. 

Last year she reportedly said over 30000 progressed pupils got bachelor’s degree passes.

Dlungwane said: “We have analysed the results of the last term and, if we compare them, it tells us that while we did well, we did not do well with the progressed learners. That gives time to put more interventions for the second term.

“We are contributing about 25% (of all Grade 12 pupils in the country), the other eight provinces produce only 75%. That means the number of progressed learners we contribute (to the national picture) will also be much higher,” he said. 

The provincial department’s head of curriculum, Dr Barney Mthembu, said the ­assessments had shown that pupils were struggling with about 10 gateway subjects, including maths, life ­sciences and accounting.

“We do not have the exact number of learners who are struggling, but we are putting measures in place to assist them. It is also important to remember that this was the first assessment, and learners, including the ones who were not progressed, will continue to develop as the year progresses,” he said. 

Mthembu said among the interventions planned would be developing easy-to-understand material for the pupils who were struggling. 

“The assessments have shown what challenges the learners are facing. We will ­develop study material to simplify some of the things, to make them easier to learn.

“We are also going to be scheduling meetings with parents to show them where the learners are struggling, and to encourage them to assist.

“We are already monitoring closely many of the schools that have more than 50% of progressed learners who will be writing their Grade 12. 

“We are concerned that those schools are already coming from a difficult position,” he said.

Negative

Mthembu said progressed pupils should not be viewed in a negative light. 

“We should not think of the progressed learners as having the potential to drag down the pass rate. They are different; some of them view being progressed as a reason to work twice as hard, and they do very well at the end,” he said. 

Education expert Professor Labby Ramrathan, of the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s School of Education, said interventions at this stage would not do much to change the ­situation. He added that trumpeting the success of pupils who had been progressed was a moot point, as the passing requirements were getting lower. 

He said it was obvious that if one lowered the pass mark, more ­people would pass. 

“The focus should be on the quality of the pass, and what learners would be able to do with the certificates,” he said.

He said just by tracking pupils, from when they start at Grade 1 all the way to Grade 12, it was clear that a large number of pupils were held back, or they “fell” off the system. 

“The pass rate is not a true reflection of the quality of the education system,” he said. 
The Mercury