Durban - Eight KwaZulu-Natal primary schools were each rewarded with gifts worth R15000 for their outstanding participation and engagement in the Rama Good Breakfast Schools Programme launched in 360 schools across the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal last year.
This four-week behaviour change programme teaches children the importance and make-up of a nutritious breakfast through interactive classes, including a “breakfast pledge” and a song, The Breakfast Beat, written by musician and Good Breakfast ambassador ProVerb.

The schools had to submit Good Breakfast Diaries that were completed by the pupils in order to stand a chance to win one of 10 gifts valued at R15000. Teachers also had to send photo and video report-back information to show how they completed the programme each week in class. The cash prizes will be used to buy kitchen equipment to ensure the pupils have a nutritious breakfast every day at school to improve concentration and performance. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

All schools were also rewarded with a fridge for their kitchens. 

“We are very pleased with the way that the schools and teachers have got behind the programme and have really committed their time and energy to make it work. 

“This is why we felt the need to reward those schools who really went the extra mile to ensure the lessons were really valuable to the learners,” said Sasha Sathianathan, Rama social mission brand manager at Unilever South Africa.

“We are proud of the impact that we have already managed to make in our first year and are looking forward to reaching more pupils with these valuable lessons.” 

Nomusa Lushaba, the principal of Duduzani Primary School, reflected on the programme and its impact on her school.

“Since the pupils started taking part in the Good Breakfast Programme in our school we have seen improvements in their behaviour as well as their concentration and overall performance. It’s amazing that something as simple as breakfast can make such a big impact. We are very grateful to Rama for their support through this programme.”



The top performing schools that received prizes valued at R15000 are:

*  Duduzani Primary School, Ntuzuma

*  Whebede Primary School, Mandeni

*  Ekuthuleni Primary School, Ntuzuma

*  Ukukhanyakokusa Primary School, Inanda

*  Magongolo Primary School Ndwedwe, Sonkombo

*  Evutha Primary School Evutha, Mandeni

*  Sifunimfundo Primary School, Inanda

*  Thekelimfundo Primary School
The Mercury