Durban - Leading economists have warned that the looting and burning of 23 trucks at the Mooi River toll plaza, on Sunday night, was economic sabotage, that could impact on South Africa’s ability to trade locally and inter-
nationally.
Damage to property and economic losses are expected to run into millions of rands.

Speculation is rife that the violence broke out after locals retaliated to an advert on Facebook which encouraged foreign nationals to apply for truck driver positions.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The advert, posted on a Facebook page - “Truck drivers without borders” - said Code 14 drivers were urgently needed.

It called on eSwatini and Zimbabwean drivers to apply. 

In response to the advert, one Facebook user, Bheki Wiseman, posted: “That’s the reason trucks were burnt.”

The recruiter on the site denied they were appointing foreigners only, saying that South African drivers already knew the requirements. 

Truck drivers suffered a similar fate at the Mooi River toll plaza over the Easter weekend, when protesters turned violent, also burning a truck and looting. 

56 suspects, aged between 17 and 46 years, are expected to appear in the Mooi River Magistrate’s Court on charges of public violence and possession of property suspected to be stolen.

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said groceries such as meat, burger patties, floor tiles and toilet paper were recovered when the police stormed the area.

Economist Bonke Dumisa labelled the incident as economic sabotage. He argued that the extent of the damage caused to the economy was much bigger than initially thought.

“The mere fact that the flow of traffic to and from Durban had been disrupted meant that there was disruption to economic activity. For many hours both the northbound and the southbound lanes were closed. This meant that even trucks headed for Durban - which is South Africa’s largest port - could not get there on time. 

“This is a major disruption to the economy,” he said.

Dumisa said incidents like this could dent South Africa’s image both domestically and internationally.    

He said as a country we had been trying to woo international investors, however, such incidents worked against any progress that may have been made. 

“While most of the trucking companies are local, the cargo that they move is either from overseas or is destined for export. This incident paints a really bad picture of South Africa.”

Dawie Roodt, also an economist, warned that such incidents stifled economic growth. 

“One of the most important aspects of any economy is that private property rights must be respected. Nobody wants to do business where private property rights are not respected.”

Roodt said it was counter-productive to destroy private property irrespective of the grievance.

He said the country was dependent on foreign investment as it had many deficits. 

“One of the deficits is that we do not have enough savings and when you do not have enough savings you cannot invest enough,” he said.

Community leaders in Mooi River, who did not want to be named, claimed the protesters were “shipped in” from other towns.

They denied local residents were behind the looting and burning.

An official from a Pietermaritzburg security company who was at the    scene, said one of the trucks that had been set alight belonged to a major food retailer.

Yesterday, residents remained on edge fearing the protests could erupt again, as holiday makers made their journey back home, after the long weekend. A resident living close to the freeway, said he watched from his home as violence erupted.

“People leading this protest are believed to be local drivers who are upset that foreigners are being employed. The guys (residents) from the Bruntville township did not lead the protest. They saw what was happening and they rushed to the scene and started looting the goods,” said the resident, who did not want to be named.

He said during the protest, he heard what sounded like gunfire and was told that it was the protesters shooting at the police. 

DA councillor in Mooi River, Nhlalayenza Ndlovu, also claimed that the people leading the protests were not from Mooi River.

“The people of Bruntville only get involved with the looting and they end up getting arrested. There is unconfirmed information that these people had come from the Estcourt area,” he said.

Transport Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda said the Department of Labour was intervening in the dispute by negotiating with the employers and drivers associations.

Police Minister Bheki Cele declined to comment on the matter and directed all questions to the Transport Minister Blade Nzimande.
The Mercury