Durban - The latest Auditor-General (AG) audit on local government has painted a grim picture of the state of KwaZulu-Natal’s 54 municipalities.
Released by Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu on Tuesday, the 2016/2017 local government audit found that the province had regressed in terms of the audit outcomes, and this was attributed to “accountability failures”.

Overall the number of clean audits declined from 20% in 2015/2016 to 11% in the financial year under review (2016/2017).AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Only seven of the 54 municipalities received clean audits, 33 had unqualified audits with findings, 10 received qualified audits, two had adverse audit findings and a further two had disclaimers.

eThekwini municipality received an unqualified audit with findings. However, the city said yesterday the findings had been significantly reduced, with no major or material issues.

Thirteen KZN municipalities regressed, with the most “concerning” regression being that of Msunduzi municipality in Pietermaritzburg, which moved from a clean audit in 2014/2015 to a disclaimer in 2016/2017.

“This municipality was characterised by a leadership and senior management team that paid little attention to the importance of key internal controls as well as the timely resolution of important audit matters,” said the AG.

The report also notes with concern the ballooning irregular expenditure incurred by KZN municipalities, with eThekwini, KwaDukuza and Umzinyathi having incurred R1billion.

The R1bn amounted to 41% of the total irregular expenditure reported by all municipalities, and of this, R513million had been incurred by eThekwini.

The AG further noted the continued abuse of section 36 of the supply chain management policy. The clause allows for deviations 
from competitive bidding processes when awarding contracts and is meant to be used in emergencies.

Co-operative Governance MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube said the poor performance seen in 2016/2017 was “unprecedented and requires radical solutions. Our message to poorly performing municipalities is clear: clean up your act or face dire consequences,” she said. - Bheki Mbanjwa
The Mercury