Durban - The South African Local Government Association (Salga) is investigating allegations of intimidation of auditor-general officials from conducting audits at eThekwini and Msunduzi municipalities.
It was reported last week that auditor-general’s office had withdrawn its team from eThekwini Municipality after they were threatened from doing their job. 

Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Zweli Mkhize also revealed that AG officials were also intimidated in Msunduzi Municipality.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The minister has received an urgent request from the auditor-general (AG) to urgently intervene and deal with the intimidation of audit managers at eThekwini and Msunduzi municipalities.

“The office of the AG has had to withdraw audit managers from the two municipalities due to intimidation and threats,” read the Cogta statement.

Mkhize expressed shock, saying “a line has been crossed” by those behind the intimidations. 

“All departments and spheres of government are expected to respect Chapter 9 institutions, including the auditor-general, and allow them to carry out their duties without fear or favour. 

“We will work with the relevant departments nationally as well as the provincial government to ensure that this matter is arrested, and that the audit functions are carried out in the two municipalities as planned without any hindrance,” said Mkhize.

Salga provincial chairperson Mluleki Ndobe also condemned the threats. 

He said that after the investigation Salga would advise Cogta and both municipalities on how to handle the situation. 

“We are deeply concerned as Salga, and we are still trying to investigate the authenticity of the allegations. We need to have the version of the affected municipalities before we reach a conclusion on the matter,” he said. 

Ndobe said threatening AG employees was a violation of the constitution. 

“A Chapter 9 institution must be supported to do its work freely without any threats or intimidation,” he said.

Ndobe said Salga was seeking a meeting with Cogta and affected municipalities “so that we create a conducive environment for the Chapter 9 institution to do its work”. 

A source close to the Msunduzi Municipality said the auditors had not abandoned the audit although there had been tensions between the auditors and senior municipal managers.

“There was a very heated meeting between the AG staff members and the Msunduzi team, which disputed the audit outcome of last year’s audit that gave the municipality a disclaimer. 

“The managers felt that the AG (team) had been unfair in their audit and failed to properly assess some matters,” said the source.

The source said a Cogta official, who chaired the meeting, had to intervene to control the situation, which “was quite heated”.

“The purpose of the AG being there is to ensure that all things are managed accordingly, and if there are now people threatening the AG’s staff members, that is totally unacceptable,” said IFP Msunduzi councillor Thinasonke Ntombela.

“We cannot have officials trying to cover up wrongdoing by intimidating the auditors,” he said.

Msunduzi mayor Themba Njilo said he wasn’t aware of any problems with the AG staff. 

“I will have to investigate this matter as it is unacceptable to threaten the AG’s team.” 
The Mercury