Kloof businesswomen Charlene Udal and Nicky Askew have embraced the power of networking and marketing to grow their small businesses - one is breaking ground in the digital marketing field and the other in the building and construction industry.
Both were recently named among the 10 finalists in the Margaret Hirsch Businesswoman Achiever of the Year Award for KZN. The winners will be announced at a gala dinner in Durban on May 11.

While they operate in vastly different sectors both women started out with minimal resources and training, yet have achieved optimal growth of their businesses.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Udal matriculated from Pinetown Girls’ High School in 1990 before studying a diploma in interior design and landing her first job at Kloof Interiors. 

She then joined property developer Pegasus Projects, which was managing the development of Umhlanga Hospital, before taking a position as personal assistant to the hospital’s general manager. There she was exposed to marketing and went on to fill the position of marketing manager.

Udal left the hospital in 1999 to take up a position as a personal assistant to the marketing and sales 
director of Trellidor at the firm’s head office in Phoenix Industrial Park. Within a year she was pro-
moted to a brand management role and for 10 years she grew the business’s marketing department.

She eventually decided to quit her job and fly solo in 2011 and set up her business, Brand Heart Digital Marketing, retaining Trellidor as one of her first clients.

“I took on their digital portfolio when I left their employ and slowly grew one client at a time through word-of-mouth referrals from clients. I didn’t have any money to market myself other than through my website. I couldn’t afford to run any ad or marketing campaigns at all,” Udal said.

“We now have 32 clients whom we serve on a monthly basis,” Udal said.

Today Udal employs four staff members and what started as a home business now operates from offices in Kloof, outside Durban. 

She attributes her success largely to hard work, commitment and learning from her mistakes, but she is also cognisant of the input she received from a mentor at a big advertising agency in Durban.

“We tend to target SMMES rather than big brands. I like to work with business owners because they give you a lot more insight into their businesses and an understanding of their long-term objectives and goals,” Udal said.

Aware that not all small businesses can afford her services, Udal recently started offering a training course for solopreneurs and SMMES that aren’t yet able to hire a full-time marketer. “I have done quite a few talks on digital marketing and how to build your brand online, and I found people would come to me and say ‘You opened my eyes. I didn’t know there were so many ways to market my business, but now I am confused’ - and I felt I was adding to people’s problems,” Udal said.

“I was mentored. I don’t have a degree in marketing, but I know what I know today because of a person who invested in me, and I want to take what I know and share it with people,” Udal said.

Training 

Nicky Askew also did not have any formal training when she took the leap from a comfortable, corporate job as an accountant in the automobile industry to join her husband Mike’s growing business T-Rific Painting in 2010. He started the business single-handed, dropping flyers in residents’ postboxes to advertise his services.

“He was very hands-on and even did the painting himself. During this time, he built great relationships with his clients and all his work came from referrals and it got to a point where Mike was not managing it all on his own,” Askew said.

Askew said she had to make the difficult decision of turning down a promotion at work to join her husband at T-Rific Painting.

She attended a Plascon Paints technical training course and her husband also trained her so that she could oversee projects. 

“I spent the first three years going to sites every morning, setting up the projects and overseeing them. I developed good relationships with the staff. I managed them in a way that was firm and yet fair.

“Running sites myself was a good grounding for learning the ins and outs of our business. As we grew, it became apparent that I needed to get more involved in sales and keep leads in the pipeline,” Askew said. 

“We hired a driver who could do all the running around, like getting materials and equipment to sites, and this gave me time to concentrate on marketing, customer care and working more on the business and not just in it,” Askew said.

But, despite the business’s growth, Askew is determined to retain its customer-centric focus.

“Professionalism, reliability, attention to detail and going the extra mile is what sets us apart from many others is our industry.  

“Painting is not a service people need often, but when you do, it can give you such peace of mind having someone that you can hire for your project that you know and can trust. There are so many questionable contractors out there and people love the fact that they have a personal relationship with us,” Askew said.
The Mercury