Durban - The eThekwini Municipality has blacklisted 42 companies, barring them from doing any business with government departments and public entities for the next five years.
Reasons for the blacklisting vary, including involvement in fraud and corruption, poor performance, collusive tendering, while some of the companies were found to have directors employed by the state.

The blacklisting of 31 companies took place on May 3. A further 11 were blacklisted on May 8. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

City spokesperson Mandla Nsele said the companies were given 14 calendar days to appeal the decision, meaning the first batch of companies had until Thursday last week to lodge appeals, while the second had until Tuesday.

The blacklisting also means that the directors of the companies will be barred from doing business with the city, while it also reviews other existing contracts that the companies in question currently have.

Once the process is complete, the city will then submit the list to National Treasury so that the ­companies can be struck off the central database. By yesterday, 10 of the companies had lodged disputes, the city said. 

“Companies can appeal the decision of the blacklisting committee as per Section 49 of the Supply Chain Management Policy. Subsequent to the appeal period, all contracts with these bidders are reviewed, in keeping with the necessary policy prescripts,” said Nsele.

Five companies fingered in probes into dodgy, multimillion-rand contracts appear on the blacklist.

While the municipality has yet to publish the names of the companies on its website, a list also seen by The Mercury has been circula­ted to departmental heads informing them of the blacklisting.

It is known that one of the contracts is now subject to a Hawks investigation, after Narendh Ganesh, the leader of Minorities of South Africa, lodged a charge with the police.

Manipulating

Ganesh, whose party has one seat in the council, said yesterday that he had laid charges because he wanted those guilty of manipulating the tender to be brought to book.

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said while the move to blacklist the companies was a positive one, more needed to be done. 

Graham said by blacklisting a company in one particular case, the city had only implemented part of the recommendations contained in the investigation reports. 

“It’s no use blacklisting the companies where the officials involved in the awarding of the tenders are still at work. Our (the city’s) own investigative unit also recommended criminal charges against some of the companies, but it is not clear what has happened,” she said.

The IFP’s Mdu Nkosi said the blacklisting was positive only if it was based on credible investigations.

“The problem now is that we have a situation where officials are divided into camps, and some of these investigations are being used to target companies seen to be aligned to some camps. Where blacklisting was based on poor performance, we, as councillors, need to visit some of these sites and projects where service delivery was supposed to take place, so that we can judge for ourselves.”
What are your thoughts on this? Tweet @TheMercurySA or comment on our Facebook page. We would like to hear from you.
The Mercury