Durban - Thousands of city residents who rely on Durban Transport buses to get around can expect to pay 8% more in fares from next month.
However, there is a reprieve for pensioners and scholars, as they will be exempted from these increases this year. 

In a letter tabled as part of a report to the city’s executive committee, bus operator Tansnat states that after meeting with the Transport Consultative Committee it had decided not to increase fares for “these two categories”.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Each day about 50 000 city residents use the Durban Transport buses. 

The city’s executive committee (exco) meeting this week approved the increase in fares, with full council expected to give the final stamp of approval this week.

According to a report tabled at exco, the fare increase was based on an independent economic assessment done annually by Transport Economic Support Services, an independent company appointed by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Transport.

“The Durban Transport contract stipulates that the fare increase must be implemented annually to prevent under-recovery and to ensure current service levels are maintained with the increasing operating costs,” the report states.

The price increase is determined by taking into consideration increases in operational costs. These include fuel prices, salaries and wages, and the increase in water and electricity tariffs, among other things.

The head of eThekwini Transport Authority, Thami Manyathi, said other bus operators in the city were implementing 10% fare hikes.

“What informs the recommendation is an investigation done by an independent company to assess all the input costs associated with running the service, and to indicate what sort of shifts, inflationary or otherwise, would have been observed in terms of those input costs,” Manyathi said.

DA caucus leader Nicole ­Graham objected to the increase, pointing out that the bus service was unreliable and “notoriously unstable”.

“Running out of diesel and stranding commuters are commonly reported. 

“Effective, affordable and stable public transport services are key to allowing the city’s ­residents to access economic and education opportunities, and should be addressed far more seriously than this matter has been,” she said.

Chief Financial Officer Krish Kumar said the city had to approve the increase, as the operator reserved the right to charge the city for the increase if it was not approved.

“Let me remind the house, it was two years ago that we did not approve a tariff increase and that is something that the operator took us on legal dispute on, and we had to pay back the money 

“We have to consider this very seriously. I understand the issues of commuters and service reliability, but I think that we have to make sure that we don’t further hamper the operator,” he said.

Exco also received an update on progress towards the establishment of a municipal entity to run the bus service. 

This is part of the move meant to ensure that the city once again controls the service it privatised in 2003.

A report tabled at the meeting states that a number of challenges had been experienced since the ­service was privatised. But the city is now forging ahead with plans to regain control of the service.

The report envisages that the bus fare income of R18 million a year would be used to ­sustain the operational costs of the service.
The Mercury