Durban - King Goodwill Zwelithini’s annual budget was increased on Thursday by R7million despite the Royal Household Trust’s failure to become a self-sustainable entity that generates its own income.
KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu announced during his budget vote for the 2018/19 financial year on Thursday that Zwelithini’s annual budget had been increased from R58.8m to R65.8m.

In the 2016/17 financial year R48.8m had been allocated to the royal household.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mchunu made the announcement at the provincial legislature in Pietermaritzburg.

The Zulu monarch’s annual budget is drawn from the premier’s budget of just more than R787m.

Mchunu’s office announced two years ago that the Trust would be given time to generate its own income instead of depending on government, but this had not materialised.

The Trust was established in 2009 in terms of the KwaZulu- Natal Royal Household Trust Act, and one of its objectives is to ensure the sustainable and financial independence of the royal household.

“There is no proper plan for fundraising in place, and therefore the Trust cannot perform on its own,” said Mchunu.

He said a team was working on helping the Trust to be financially independent and had recently promised that it had finalised the operating business plan.

“If it (the plan) does not prove to be useful then the executive council will think twice about the desirability of such a programme,” Mchunu said.

The Trust was allocated an additional R5m to start fundraising initiatives.

The increase in the king’s budget was welcomed by parties in Parliament with the IFP and NFP even expressing that the allocation would never be enough if it is not done with input from the king.

Currently the provincial government, through the Royal Household Trust, pays for the education of the king’s children, maintaining eight royal palaces, farms, six queens and costs of royal ceremonies such as the Reed Dance, Amaganu and First Fruits ceremonies.

Mchunu did not give a breakdown of the Trust’s allocation, or explain why it was necessary to increase the king’s budget.

IFP MPL Blessed Gwala said he was not impressed that the king was not consulted with regard to the increase in the budget.

Last year the king bemoaned the amount of financial backing he gets from the government, saying he should be paid more considering his subjects are the ones contributing the most to the country’s well-being.

NFP MPL Erickson Zungu said his party was also not happy with the work done in renovating the palaces.

“About R30m was allocated for the renovation of the premier’s official residence, but R10m was earmarked for the king’s palace at Ingwavuma. The R7m increase for the king is too little,” Zungu said.

DA MPL Zwakele Mncwango said the DA welcomed the increase, but called on the province to account for wasteful expenditure.

“They could not tell us how the Royal Household Trust would raise funds, while they are spending more than R5m in branding and marketing,” he said.

Mchunu also announced that more than R59.8m had been allocated to heritage projects such as the unveiling of statues of the founder of the Zulu nation, King Shaka Ka Senzangakhona, Struggle stalwarts Moses Mabhida, Monty Naicker and Pixley ka Isaka Seme, as well as a monument in honour of Josiah Gumede.

“The department will also commission statues of Fatima Meer and Solomon Linda.

“We will also install monuments in honour of Phalane kaMdinwa Mkhwanazi and Ntshingwayo kaMahole Khoza,” he said.

Mkhwanazi and Khoza are regarded as heroes of the Anglo-Zulu War, which took place at Isandlwana and elsewhere in north-east KwaZulu-Natal in 1879.
The Mercury