Durban - Police are yet to make an arrest in the murder of a KwaZulu-Natal professor who was shot dead this week. Professor Gregory Kamwendo was shot dead as he was arriving at his residence, at an upmarket complex in Empangeni, on Tuesday.
The KwaZulu-Natal academic community is shocked and questioning the possible motive.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Read: KZN professor gunned down

The 53-year-old was the Dean of the Faculty of Arts at the University of Zululand.

It is believed he was returning home from work just after 5pm, when he was approached by two armed men.

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said Kamwendo was shot multiple times in the upper body and died in his car.

University of Zululand spokesperson Gcina Nhleko described Kamwendo as "a fountain of knowledge who would be sorely missed".

While police said the motive for the shooting was not yet known, the university called for calm in a statement announcing Kamwendo’s death.

Prior to joining UniZulu in 2016, Kamwendo was the Dean of Education at the University of KwaZulu-Natal.

He was succeeded by Professor Thabo Msibi who said it was “incomprehensible how someone with such humility, kindness and care could be murdered in such a heinous manner.

“The entire School of Education at UKZN is in mourning. Professor Kamwendo will be remembered for his passion for transformation, his passion for the promotion of indigenous languages, and for his incredible care for staff and students,” he said.

“We wish to convey our condolences to the family and the University of Zululand. We pray that God will give Mrs Kamwendo and the kids strength and healing during these trying moments.”

Kamwendo, a Malawian national, had a home in Pinetown where he lived with his wife, daughter, two sons and a grandchild.

Lukhona Mnguni, a PhD research intern at UKZN, described Kamwendo as an energetic, charismatic and committed scholar. He fondly recalled their time together at UKZN.

“He was noticeable, first for his bursts of laughter and loud voice when excited to see someone, followed by a very much heartfelt handshake.”

Kind-hearted as he was, Kamwendo “clutched onto a fight if he felt convinced about his motives for it”, said Mnguni.

He said the murder was a “sad and brutal reminder of the precarious state of human life in our country, especially in KwaZulu-Natal. This cannot be allowed to go on unabated”.

This was echoed by Connie September, chairperson of the portfolio committee on higher education and training. She called for law enforcement authorities to do all they can to ensure that the murderers are found and punished.
The Mercury