Durban - City manager, Sipho Nzuza has assured residents that eThekwini Municipality remained committed to working with all relevant authorities to ensure that the process of auditing the city’s books continues without any undue interference. 
On Monday, Nzuza met with the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Leaders Head of Department, Thando Tubane and his senior management team to discuss the matter.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This follows reports of the withdrawal of the KwaZulu-Natal Auditor-General (AG) staff from conducting audits in the Municipality last week after they were allegedly threatened from doing their jobs.

Read: AG’s audit team withdrawn from the eThekwini Municipality

The officials agreed to work together to put in place safety measures that will ensure the safety and security of the AG staff who will soon return to the Municipality to continue with the auditing process. COGTA further pledged their full support towards the municipality to assist in resolving this matter.

eThekwini Municipality's Mandla Nsele said it should be noted that the work being conducted by the AG’s office is not an investigation, but a routine auditing process (Interim Audit)

Nzuza supported the process and assures residents that the municipality will fully co-operate with all stakeholders to ensure that the process is completed without any fear of intimidation or threats.

“As eThekwini Municipality, we are committed to ensuring clean and good governance. As evident in the Auditor-General Report released recently for the 2016/17 financial year, there has been a significant decrease in irregular expenditure from R1.3 billion in 2011/2012 to R513 million in 2016/2017. The report also reflected that the number of findings was significantly reduced with no major or material issues. This is due to several measures we have already implemented. We also have a zero-tolerance approach to non-compliance and remain fully committed to running a clean administration,” Nzuza said. 
The Mercury