Durban - Security cluster ministers have painted a bleak picture of political killings in KwaZulu-Natal following the police’s failure to arrest suspects despite the death of seven politicians since the start of this year.
Police Minister Bheki Cele, Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, State Security Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba and Justice Minister Michael Masutha were in Durban on Monday to address the media on their meeting with KZN Premier Willies Mchunu and the police leadership in the province.

The ministers are part of a task team formed in 2016 to deal with political murders in the province.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mapisa-Nqakula said they were very much concerned about the co-ordination from the various structures of the team - the SSA ( State Security Agency), the prosecution, the Hawks and justice.

“Those observations made us understand why there are delays in terms of arrests, prosecutions and issues of containing witnesses so that they don’t disappear or be intimidated,” she said.

Mapisa-Nqakula described the challenges as very serious. 

She said she and her colleagues were tempted to elaborate on the causes of the failures, but couldn’t do so without first briefing President Cyril Ramaphosa on what was going on in the province.

“Otherwise we would be fired. These are just highlights of what we are dealing with in the province,” she said.

Masutha said “it had become abundantly clear” that the various departments weren’t pulling together.

He said there was a situation where one agency would say “we have done our bit and it is the other side that has dropped the ball”, while the other side would say “we didn’t drop the ball because the ball just didn’t arrive”.

“Prosecution should guide investigation so that the matter becomes trial-ready when the docket is submitted for prosecutorial decision and subsequent prosecution,” he said.

Cele said the team would in the near future inform the nation of how the security cluster bodies would be strengthened.

“For now there is a prosecutor that works with the team, who needs to guide them so
 by the time we go for prosecution everything is ready,” he said.

He said part of the reason the law enforcement authorities were unable to prevent murders before they occurred was because of the weakness of crime intelligence. “For almost six years there was no head of intelligence, which gave rise to problems,” he said.

Cele said he hoped the situation would improve with the appointment of the new head of crime intelligence, Anthony Jacobs. 

“We hope we will be better in understanding these things before they happen,” he said.

He said he did not think that the disputed ANC provincial conference, to be held next month, was the main cause of the murders since political killings had started to escalate in 2011.

“We do want to deal with this culture of impunity in this province, and we hope that it comes to an end,” he said.
The Mercury