Durban - Two people were killed and at least 12 others injured in crashes in Durban at the weekend. 
On Saturday, a biker was declared dead after he collided into a car at the intersection of Lighthouse Road and Ulster Avenue on the Bluff. 
Rescue Care Operations Director, Garrith Jamieson, said the biker believed to be in his 40s, had sustained major injuries.
"Paramedics assessed him at the scene however his injuries were to severe and he was declared deceased on the scene. The car driver had sustained minor injuries and was treated on the scene by paramedics," he said. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Eight people were killed in a two car collision at Umgeni Road 
Picture: Rescue Care

In another collision, eight people have been injured after two vehicles collided at the intersection of Umgeni Road and Walter Gilbert Road on Friday.
Jamieson said, paramedics arrived at the scene just before 10:30pm to find carnage. 
"Two cars had collided in the junction before one vehicle overturned colliding into pedestrians who were sitting on the pavement. One pedestrian had sustained critical injuries and was placed on a manual ventilator at the scene. He was then rushed to a nearby hospital for the further care that he required. A further seven people had sustained various injuries and were also stabilised on the scene before being transported to nearby hospitals for the further care that they required," Jamieson said. 
In an earlier crash, one man was killed and three others injured after a head on collision in Newlands West Drive, near Fosa. 
One person was killed and three others injured in a car crash in Newlands West
Picture: Rescue Care

Jamieson said paramedics arrived on the scene just after 8pm to find the entire roadway closed. 
"Two cars had collided in a head on collision. A male believed to be in his 20s was severely entrapped and paramedics assessed him and found that he had sustained major injuries. Unfortunately there was nothing paramedics could do and he was declared deceased on the scene. Three occupants from the second vehicle had sustained moderate injuries and were stabilised at the scene before being transported to nearby Hospitals for the further care that they required," Jamieson said. 
Police are investigating all incidents further. 
The Mercury