Durban - First-year quantity surveying student, Zolile Khumalo was allegedly shot dead by an ex-student at the Mangosuthu University of Technology (MUT) student residence in Lonsdale in Durban CBD on Tuesday night.
The alleged killer posted a message of regret on Facebook Wednesday morning, "konke kwaphenduka umlando ukube benginamandla bengzomvusa silungise amaphutha ngomlomo ...kodwa mnj kuphi laa ngba usehambe wangshiya ngingasashongo ukt ngyamxolela" (All is history now. If I had the power I was going to make her rise - from the dead - so that we can talk about the mistakes... but now she is gone before I could even tell her that I forgive her.)ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

MUT spokesperson, Bheki Hlophe, confirmed the incident adding that the university was still trying to get more details from eyewitnesses.

“The university has learnt with shock of the sudden passing of Zolile Khumalo, a first-year Quantity Surveying student. MUT warden at one of its outsourced residences, where the incident happened, reported that Zolile was shot and killed by an ex-student of the University yesterday[Tuesday],” Hlophe said in a media statement.

The South African Student Congress (SASCO) posted their condolences on Facebook.

"We send our deep heartfelt condolences to her family,friends,comrades and classmates, indeed the life lived by Comrade Zolile was not just an ordinary student Life she was a pillar of women in this society," SASCO said. 

South African Democratic Students Movement (SADESMO) called for both political and religious structures to unite against such crimes.

The movement said they were "deeply hurt" and " sad" by the loss. 
"We would like to sincerely pass our condolences to the Khumalo family and entire MUT student population. It is high that we unite together as leadership structures both political and religious to fight against such calamity, this is uncalled for," the movement said. 
The post went viral on social media with hundreds of people sharing and commenting.