Durban - Acting head of Metro Police Steve Middleton wants security guards employed by private companies throughout the city to play a more active role in combating crime close to the areas where they work.
Middleton said the hundreds of security guards guarding the city buildings could do short patrols as part of crime prevention efforts.

He was presenting a proposal on crime prevention strategies during a meeting at the Durban City Hall on Monday.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Middleton said his proposal had not been tabled or approved by the city.

The meeting was chaired by the city’s deputy mayor Fawzia Peer, who is also responsible for the safety portfolio. 

It was attended by close to 200 people and included representatives from Community Policing Forums, police and private security company officials.

“The city spends about R500million on security companies, there are security guards deployed in all sites owned by the city. We should look at extending the scope and the mandate of those security guards,” said Middleton. 

He said the guards could do 100-metre patrols in front of the buildings they guarded. 

The city law enforcements agencies, said Middleton, could also partner with security companies. 

Middleton also stressed that crime prevention should be a holistic effort that dealt with issues such as homelessness and poverty.

He said homelessness and vagrancy were topical issues because of the large number of homeless people.

“There is nothing in the city’s by-laws that deals with vagrancy. Metro police could arrest 1000 people for vagrancy and other violations but they will be released in 30 minutes. The city needs to attend to this,” he said. 

Middleton said the city should be creative in dealing with the issue of vagrancy and homelessness. 

“I recently went to Cape Town and found that vagrants wake up in the morning and they clean parts of the city. They are then paid by the city. 

“We could do something like that and the city could also build accommodation where homeless people could sleep,” he said.

Community members said the city had put many crime prevention strategies in place and it was important to measure the success of those initiatives.

“At least once a month, we should get reports on what the people guarding the bridges (against stone throwing) have achieved. What has been achieved with the safe city campaign and all other initiatives?” asked one community member. 
The Mercury