The KZNSA Gallery presents, The Tolerance Travelling Poster Show which could as well be called the inventive eye as makers of posters are graphic designers who have a very quirky eye on life.
This exhibition includes the work of some of the world’s most noted graphic designers including those from the African continent like Brandt Botha, Garth Walker, Saki Mafundikwa and Chaz Maviyane-Davies. The show was started by graphic designer Mirko Ili, a Bosnian-born, New York-based artist who has experience that ranges from comics, illustrations, art-directed posters, books, and record covers. 

When he arrived in America he became the art director of Time Magazine International Edition, and later became the art director of the Op-Ed pages of the New York Times.  With The Tolerance Travelling Poster Show, Ili wanted to find a way to get artists involved in helping to promote tolerance across the world. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

He invited graphic designers from all over the world to each contribute a poster that is an interpretation of the word tolerance in their language. South African graphic designer and illustrator, Brandt Botes created a yellow poster that features the term “verdraagsaamheid” which means tolerance in Afrikaans.

Today the exhibition has grown into a worldwide event that has been held in places like the US, Slovenia, Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia, Spain, Holland, Turkey, Ukraine and the Dominican Republic. 

Ili believes that it will promote the idea that art can move from being something that can only be accessed through art galleries and museum spaces. He believes art should be more accessible to the public by also showing it in public areas from urban walls to parks, shopping malls and other such areas where possible. 

Durban had several walls dedicated to murals and it certainly helps to make people more aware that art lives everywhere. A recent addition was the mural on the outer wall at the Phansi Museum by veteran Durban artist Joseph Manana.

The Tolerance Travelling Poster Show made its African debut at the Design Indaba Conference 2018, where attendees got to engage with the posters as part of an outside pop-up gallery.

In each new exhibition, new posters are added to the collection, and the poster of Mandela by Durban designer Garth Walker is certainly drawing much attention. 

Meanwhile on the KZNSA Mezzanine is a small but interesting exhibit titled The Fashion Revolution.

 It’s a brilliant youthful take on the idea of fashion as an environmentally and politically conscious movement. Designers such as Leandri Mulder, who highlights denim materials in her work and re-uses the fabric, contribute to larger conversations on society and its over-use of materials. 

Through fashion, the clothing and film on exhibition kicks off the urgent conversation we all need to have - #whomademyclothes. The multi-layered conversations touch on ethics, knowing where your clothing is made and how to up-cycle old items. Worth watching, but even better, worth trying!