Technology is disrupting traditional enterprise models and corporate employees from the boardroom to the factory floor are being forced to adapt quickly to compete with highly competitive start-up businesses.
This was the picture painted by several Durban business leaders at a panel discussion hosted by Deloitte last week on navigating the future of work. The event highlighted the impact of the fourth industrial revolution on the workplace, business leaders, employees and customers.

Unilever SA executive vice-president Luc-Olivier Marquet said the firm “employed” eight robots in its local Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) manufacturing business, which had been hard hit abroad by the shift to e-commerce.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“What happened in China recently was quite amazing with the explosion of Alibaba, and it is not just Unilever. All the big FMCGs - Nestlé, Royal and the likes - had a really tough performance in the past three or four years in China,” Marquet said. “But we did not anticipate the speed of change, and who would have been thinking that a company like Unilever, selling soup and soap, would end up selling close to 30% of business in China via e-commerce? 

“That was a very significant shift that affected the performance of the company.”

Marquet said Unilever uses eight robots in South Africa, which had resulted in cost savings and the shedding of 54 jobs. He said the multi-
national has two robots which can take customer calls, accept orders and invoice customers via e-mail, working in its customer services division, and one of these is used in South Africa.

“It is just mind-blowing. What’s dramatically changing is the affordability of robots, which are becoming more affordable. For R150000 you can have a collaborative robot in your factory.”

He said the firm was committed to growing the local economy.

“Clerk jobs will be significantly reduced and on the manufacturing side too we will not be making thousands of jobs, but on the client and spaza shop side we will need people,” Marquet said.

“We have a duty and a key role to play in developing the local economy, so while we are moving into robotics and shared service centres in Bangalore, we are committed to creating jobs and are going to create 500 new jobs this year for unemployed people who will sell our products in the townships.” 

He said businesses needed to rethink the profile of employees and relationships with customers in light of the fourth industrial revolution.

“It is becoming very complicated to target consumers in an environment where millennials don’t watch TV any more - it’s purely digital and they have ad blockers in their computers and you have just five seconds to catch them. 

“It’s shaking us completely and we are constantly reviewing the way we are doing things,” Marquet said.

Deloitte Consulting Africa’s digital transformation leader, Arun Babu, said business was experiencing the demise of the “scalable efficiency” model on which most companies were built.

“Future organisations need to be around the concept of scalable learning - being able to learn new things and take one step forward every day. 

“It’s a culture where every individual is trying to move the organisation forward to compete against hundreds of start ups, in the different departments of the business.” 

However, Babu said local businesses had been slow to embrace the concept of becoming agile organisations that swiftly react to change.

He added that the concept of a holacracy, which removes staff titles and allows employees to work between several departments to make a contribution, provides another opportunity for businesses to experiment. In a holacracy a young employee working in an unrelated department can walk into the marketing department and write a proposal to change the way the firm markets itself, Babu said.

“It’s not based on titles and experiences but is a complete mind change. Imagine a world where there are no titles and no positions without having these organisational structures,” he said.

 Deloitte Consulting Africa’s human capital partner Janine Nel said the future workplace would see the deconstruction of jobs with man and machine working together in an environment where 60% of primary school children today will be working in jobs that don’t yet exist.
The Mercury