EDITOR'S VIEW - Judges Patrick Gamble and Monde Samela of the Western Cape High Court expressed concern at the damage to governance caused by the ongoing scrap between mayor Patricia de Lille and her party, the DA.
Reinstating her for the time being in the mayoral parlour, and in her party, they said in part of their judgment that chopping and changing in the city’s executive was not to the benefit of Cape Town.

They said they were “genuinely concerned” about the harm De Lille’s loss of office had for Capetonians. This was a serious factor in the judges’ considerations.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The nub of this was the impact of the fight on service delivery. There was the draft budget and the water crisis. “There are also important decisions which crop up on an almost daily basis around planning, and persistent problems around land invasions, to name a few,” they said.

As there are in Durban, Pietermaritzburg, Joburg, Port Elizabeth, Bloemfontein - in every city, town and village in South Africa, in fact. So Judge Gamble and Judge Samela’s remarks could have applied to all places undergoing political turbulence.

Unfortunately, there are a lot of them. Adversarial politics is customary, but the width, depth and complexity of upheavals at all levels of government are cause for the greatest worry.

Beyond the hurly-burly of democratic opposition politics, there are internal party rivalries and personality clashes. These are often part of greater power struggles and the formation of camps, where public representatives and officials view their posts as a means to employment, and then enrichment.

The worst current example of such deleterious shenanigans is Mahikeng, and the battle focused on suspended Premier Supra Mahumapelo.

Had Judges Gamble and Samela been presiding over an application in North West, they might have dwelt more than they did in the Cape Town matter on concerns for service delivery.

North West is just one example of failing our citizens. With the turbulence in the dominant party in KZN, for instance, it's fair to ask what damage this has inflicted on governance. To what extent has the power play in this province distracted public representatives, and officials, from their main function?

So it goes, from central government and Parliament to provincial and local councils. Judging by recent, official indictments of many of the country’s local authorities, it seems they have not been focused at all on their core purpose.

Also, how much progress was achieved in the long build-up to the ANC’s elective conference at Nasrec in December? It seems the camps and jockeying contaminated governance at all levels. There is a powerful argument that our extraordinary politics, often unhealthy and even lethal, is hamstringing this country’s growth; and continuing to expose South Africa to the grave risk of unfulfilled promises.
The Mercury