OPINION - The 2018 Tourism Indaba, dubbed Africa’s Travel Indaba, has come and gone and the prospects for growing the business of tourism in Durban have never looked so good.
The direction of engagements and the plans that we have as the city, both in terms of infrastructure investments and our global marketing and partnerships initiatives, makes us confident that Durban will be a gateway into the African continent. 

The Tourism Indaba, which will be hosted in Durban for the next four years, has once again brought in international, African and domestic buyers, media and trade partners, providing a perfect platform for us to engage the global tourism community on how best we can grow tourism in our respective tourism businesses.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The biggest highlight for this year’s Indaba was the announcement by the British Airways Airline of a direct flight between Durban and Heathrow Airport in London. 

This is a major milestone for us as it speaks directly to our immediate task of driving conversions with the UK market, which happens to be one of our leading and key source markets.  

Our strategy has always been to consolidate our existing source markets while trying to enter into new markets, and this announcement goes a long way into helping us achieve that objective. 

The route will begin flying on a three times weekly schedule and is expected to start on  October 29.

This decision will not only allow Durban and KwaZulu-Natal to showcase itself as a tourism and business destination to a global audience, but it will also complement and give impetus to the infrastructure drive that we have embarked on, as it will spark the necessary demand. 

Furthermore, this direct link between Durban and London is in line with the global trend which has seen more and more airlines flying directly to more than one city in a country, and it has served a purpose of diversifying trade and economic hubs.

It also provides an opportunity and platform for our respective destinations to expand their local business, trade, investment, cultural and tourism links. 

In terms of visitors and related logistics, we have also witnessed a sizeable amount of growth as we saw an increased number of delegates and participants. This year, delegates from more than 80 countries descended on our shores for the indaba. Overall registrations reached the 7000 mark, resulting in an increase of 4% from last year’s figures.

In total, there were 1747 registered buyers, an increase of 14% from last year, and there were over 1100 registered exhibitors, an increase of 5.7% from the previous year. Of the exhibitors, 200 were first-timers. Furthermore, 23 African countries attended the indaba.

The growing number of African countries at Africa’s Travel Indaba is indicative of them seeing the benefit of the expo and being part of a show that focuses only on Africa, hence putting Indaba and Durban on the international map.  

Last year, it was announced that the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Convention Centre would be home to the indaba for the next five years. Africa’s Travel Indaba plays a significant role to the city of Durban’s economy. At this year’s three-day show, R89 million is estimated to have been injected into KZN’s GDP.

Over the years, the direct spend and its contribution to the economy has enabled us to justify the investment we make into hosting it.  

Over and above the number of international visitors and increased direct economic spend, the indaba also makes a significant contribution to the city’s GDP and job creation initiatives.  

In just one week, we see most hotels operating at full capacity, and our local tourism and hospitality  markets witness a spike in the numbers of customers. 

Indaba is one of the events we are proud to host as it gives us an opportunity to draw the attention of the world to our city, and showcase its tourism and hospitality products to the global travel trade community. 

Another important element was this year’s Africa Travel Indaba being hosted in a significant year in our calendar - the year of the Nelson Mandela centenary celebration, which the government has affectionately called the year of Nelson Mandela. 

In this regard, we felt it was fitting that Durban hosted this global showpiece as we also had a lot of historical sites that are significant in retracing the footsteps of Mandela and the history of the country at large. 

The Inanda Heritage Route has places like Ohlange, where Mandela cast his first democratic vote and a gravesite of the first ANC president, Dr JL Dube. 

In keeping with the theme of “Africa’s Stories, your success”, we decided to use this year’s indaba as a launch pad for how we plan to transform it to a level where it 
directly impacts the lives of our people. 

In our view, this can only be achieved by the creation of a global city that is both investment and tourism friendly.  In this regard, we have also earmarked a number of key infrastructure investments that will change the landscape of the city and create a true global destination that will be a gateway into the African continent. 

We believe we have already done the necessary groundwork in terms of creating brand awareness in the global community.  

Some of the important initiatives we have taken in promoting Durban to the world include creating partnerships with strong global brands like National Geographic, Euro-Sport, The Cell C Sharks, Lady-
smith Black Mambazo and many others. 

The National Geographic campaign allowed us to reach more 
than 500 million households globally and a further 350million through our partnership with Eurosport.

These continue to expose us to new markets in the global arena, hence the need to then channel our focus on building the necessary 
capacity in anticipation of when the world comes to Durban. 

We have already started major investments, in partnership with the private sector, to ensure that we build the necessary capacity to ensure that Durban continues to be a global city and Africa’s leading tourism and investment destination. 

Some of the cutting-edge investments that we have undertaken in this regard include the R200 million investment towards a Cruise Terminal in the Durban Harbour. 

The project is expected to complement the R35billion Durban Point Waterfront development of the beach promenade expansion.  

These are some of the many investments that include projects like The Sails, Kings Estate mixed-zone development, Oceans Umhlanga, Virginia Airport expansion and many others. 

It is for this reason that we are confident that this year’s Africa Travel Indaba was a beginning of a story, one that we termed as “Durban’s story, our collective success”. 



*  Sithole is eThekwini’s deputy city manager for economic development and planning
The Mercury