Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Health Department will need at least R1billion above their R42bn budget to pay off debts from the last financial year.
This was revealed by the MEC for Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, speaking at a press briefing shortly before he delivered the province’s budget at the KZN Legislature on Wednesday.

He said although he believed the department received their “fair share” of the budget, compared to other departments in the province, they would always experience a shortfall.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The things we are faced with are unprecedented. Last year’s money is already gone, and we still have people to pay. We don’t have enough, but we can’t complain locally, we have to go higher up,” Dhlomo said. 

KZN carries the largest burden of HIV and related infections in South Africa, with the HIV/TB co-infection rate estimated at approximately 65%. 

The department has also come under intense fire for their failure to provide decent oncology services in the province - an issue that the department will have to answer for at the Human Rights Commission on Monday. 

The DA’s Imraan Keeka said financial mismanagement had led to accruals of almost R1.7bn, and the consequence of a 1% VAT increase adds, at a minimum, added pressure of R152m. 
Also read: KZN health sets its sights on specialised clinical services

“The outlook, in terms of this department’s budget, is dismal, as there will be no new clinics or hospitals in KZN. This is in spite of promises to the izinduna and people of
Umbumbulu that a hospital would be built. There is not enough money to buy either new ambulances or new equipment for them, nor will the 5926 vacant posts be filled. In fact, this year will be worse than last year,” Keeka said. 

The shortage of essential medication at facilities were also a major concern in the province. 

However, Dhlomo said KZN could declare that shortages of essential medicine in its facilities was a thing of the past, since successfully installing a province-wide computer software system that links healthcare facilities with drug depots and suppliers. 

Addressing the programme that allows South Africans to study medicine in Cuba, Dhlomo said in the last week of next month, KZN would be receiving 262 qualified doctors - the largest cohort of qualified doctors - returning from Cuba. 

“For the first time, the student doctors would be placed in various hospitals throughout the province, as opposed to the erstwhile approach where their training was mainly concentrated in the metropolitan areas of eThekwini and uMsunduzi municipalities,” Dhlomo said. 

He spoke proudly of the new 500-bed Dr Pixley Ka Isaka Seme Memorial Hospital expected to open its doors just over a year from now. It is expected to cater for about 1.5million people of Inanda, Ntuzuma, KwaMashu (INK) and surrounding areas.

This R2.7bn level 2 regional hospital is situated near the Bridge City Mall, and will serve as a referral centre for all surrounding public healthcare facilities.
The Mercury