Durban - The beleaguered Durban Solid Waste (DSW) Unit has made a startling admission that it does not have enough money to fund the ballooning costs of the controversial township waste management contract.
On Tuesday, a report was tabled before the the city’s executive committee (exco) where DSW acknowledged that it will require an additional R95.6million for the contract, whose term expires at the end of next month.

The contract was awarded to four contractors last December, but now DSW wants the value of the contract increased to R130m (excluding VAT).AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In a report tabled before exco DSW states that the original R45m budget estimate had been based on the contract running for three months. 

However, the Bid Adjudication Committee had approved the contract to run for six months without the cost being adjusted.

“An adjustment of contract amount in order to align with the six-month period, ending in June 2018, is therefore required,” states the report signed by DSW acting head Noluthando Magewu and by Philemon Mashoko, the deputy city manager responsible for trading services under which DSW falls.

The unit admits that the funds required are not provided for in the current budget of the unit. 

“Savings amounting to R34.4m have been identified. There are no savings from which the balance of R95.6m can be obtained,” the report reads.

In justifying the additional budget, DSW states that service protests were experienced in the southern, northern and central parts of the city, and that these “contributed to the high cost of 
illegal dumping service”.

Exco approved the request for the amendment of the contract and also granted chief finance officer Krish Kumar the authority to identify savings of up to R95.6m to supplement the R34.4m of savings already identified by the unit.

The DA objected to this request, with Heinz de Boer questioning how the bid adjudication committee could have not foreseen the blunder of extending the contract period but not making adjustments to the budget allocated.

The contract has stirred controversy with some contractors complaining of non-payment and thus downing tools in townships like uMlazi.

On Friday mayor Zandile Gumede apologised to the residents of uMlazi about the disruptions to refuse removal, and promised that it would not happen again. 

She had also announced that the city was strengthening its security measures after threats directed at officials.

Last week, a group of angry subcontractors stormed the unit’s headquarters and held officials against their will demanding payment. Sources alleged that the reason for the delay in payments was due to the budget having been depleted because of higher than expected claims for waste collection in illegal dump sites.

The Mercury understands that the city has also been questioning the invoices submitted by some contractors as it believes some of them may have been inflated.

“The service providers have been requested to submit evidence of work done in order to quantify the amount required for illegal dumping since it is not capped,” reads another part of the report.

As per the provisions of Section 116 (3) of the Municipal Finance Management Act, a contract can only be amended after it has been tabled in council and after the local community has been given “reasonable notice of the intention to amend the contract or agreement; and has been invited to submit representations to the municipality”.

Speaking to The Mercury after the exco meeting, Mashoko said the city had to use contractors in areas like uMlazi after experiencing problems with “our staff on a number of occasions”.

Asked about the ballooning budget, Mashoko said the main problem was with the illegal dumping sites which are difficult to predict.

“You can’t predict about the dirt to be collected. You can’t predict that there is going to be an illegal dump there. These contractors collect in illegal dumps. You find that they clean but later there is an illegal dump and then you have to tell them to go and collect that again, it’s a dynamic target,” he said.

Mashoko explained that the city’s clean-up drive in areas like Isipingo had also led to the increase in the volumes of waste being collected.

“You find that when you are doing clean-ups, the contractors must be there and they will be charging,” he said.

During the exco meeting mayor Gumede congratulated Mashoko and Magewu for the clean-ups in areas like Isipingo.

Gumede said she was being inundated by calls from people of Isipingo who were appreciative of the “wonderful job” of cleaning up the area.
The Mercury