Durban - Two classes at Dundee Secondary School took place outside this week as mobile classes promised by the Department of Education are yet to be delivered.
One Grade 9 class and one Grade 6 class had been taught outside this week.

On Wednesday, the school decided that to prevent pupils from having to learn outside, parents were notified that those in grades 4 and 6 should come to school only on alternate days, to allow for grades 7, 8 and 9 to use the classrooms on the other days.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The remainder of the more than 900 pupils, those in grades 1 to 4, will attend school daily.

The school’s mainly prefabricated classrooms, which were decades old, were demolished earlier this month as there were fears for the safety of the pupils.

Read: Container classroom outcry: Parents oppose temporary solution

Some had already been injured due to falling debris and parents had kept their children away from school and had protested.

The department intervened and a temporary solution of new mobile classrooms was promised. However, they have yet to be delivered.

A teacher, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisal, said they were then forced to combine classes and teach 70 to 90 children in a room.

“It was intolerable. There was no way any teaching and learning was going to go on in those conditions. So it was then decided that two classes will be taught outside.”

School governing body chairperson Gift Gaysman said this attempt at a solution was not feasible as children were exposed to the elements and could not see their books or the board properly in the harsh sunlight.

“We are having it quite tough. We have had several meetings with a Department of Education district director who initially promised mobile units but has not delivered.

“Things have become even more ridiculous now, because he knows the situation but is no longer responding to us,” he said.

Queen Thompson said she and other parents wanted Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane to intervene, as the district officials “did not seem to care”.

“They have failed those children and this community. They either give us empty promises, not talk to us, or hide behind protocol.

“The buck stops with the MEC so he must come in and solve this struggle. Our children don’t deserve this,” she said.

Education spokesperson Sicelo Khuzwayo said the matter was of great concern to the department. Education authorities didn’t want to see pupils subjected to such conditions.

He said it was working to speed up the process to have the new mobile classrooms delivered as soon as possible.

“We understand there is immense pressure on the children, teachers and parents - and it is on us too. What is causing the delay is transportation, which is done through service providers, but everything is finalised. In fact, the school is among those being prioritised for upgrading but, in the meantime, mobile classes will be delivered soon,” he said.

The Mercury