Durban - The upcoming Comrades Marathon is expected to inject R355 million into the city’s economy. This was announced during a presentation to the eThekwini Municipality's Executive Council earlier this week. 

KwaZulu-Natal Athletics president, Sello Mokoena, said the race received 23 800 entries this year with 20 000 runners qualifying to run.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Speaking on the economic impact of the race, he said a commissioned independent economic impact assessment done by North-West University found that the Comrades Marathon was the second largest event contributing to the city’s economy.

“The Comrades is second only to the Durban July which generates R440 million, while the Comrades contributes R355 million to the local economy. It is a huge event for the city,” he said.

Mokoena said he was grateful to be partnering with the city for the race, which is also known as the ultimate human race. 

This year the runners will start in Pietermaritzburg and finish - for the first time - at the  iconic Moses Mabhida Stadium.

Mokoena said entrant numbers are limited because of infrastructural constraints. 

“At the start of the race, the road needs to be wider to accommodate runners. The finish also has to be bigger which is why we are pleased to partner with the city and have the race end at a bigger venue. We are working to increase the number of applicants as there is a great demand. We are therefore grateful for the partnership we have with the City.”

EThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede welcomed the presentation saying the Comrades Marathon was an important event for the city especially in terms of the economy.

She said tourists would be flocking to the city because of the race.

“We need to look at how we, as the city, can assist to draw bigger crowds to eThekwini because of the race. We need to attract more visitors to the city and help expand the race. The city manager’s office will deal with technical aspect of how we can assist in expanding the race and bring tourists into Durban as a result,” she said.
This year's race takes place on June 10.

The Mercury