Durban - While most people are celebrating the announcement that KwaZulu-Natal travellers will now be able to fly directly from Durban to London's Heathrow Airport, people on Twitter are asking why did SAA miss out on the 'potentially lucrative' opportunity.

Menzi Kulati @menzikulati wrote "By the time #SAA wakes up and closing routes: British Airways will have taken over the region - they'll be flying from King Shaka (Durban) to (London) Heathrow (3 flights a week)."AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Last week Business Report  reported that troubled SAA is unlikely to get out of its financial troubles any time soon, with audited statements painting a dire situation for the airline.
The financials, which were tabled in Parliament, showed that the successive losses, a huge debt and operating costs have sunk the carrier into serious financial crisis.
"BA commencing daily direct flights from Durban to London, glad for Durban and KSIA but that's another potentially lucrative route gone to the competition," posted Khi Wodumo @iKhilogram.
The joint announcement was made in Durban on Tuesday morning by the KZN MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Sihle Zikalala and British Airways at a breakfast ahead of Africa’s Tourism Indaba, which officially opens this week. 

 



The new direct airline service between the two cities will commence on October 29, with three direct flights a week from Heathrow to the King Shaka International Airport.
Also read: Now you can fly directly from Durban to London

“As of Wednesday, the public can book their flight between London and Durban on the 214 passenger aircraft. The investment and trade opportunities presented by this direct flight between Durban and London will undoubtedly add huge value to our economy,” Zikalala said.

Approximately 10 000 passengers who currently fly indirectly between Durban and London via Johannesburg will now fly directly to Durban. This will drastically reduce travel times and costs. 
Other reactions from Twitter: