EDITOR'S VIEW - The decision by eThekwini Municipality to blacklist 42 companies from doing business with the city should be applauded by those who view corruption as a cancer that eats away at citizens’ faith in democracy.
There are many reasons companies are barred from doing business with the city, including fraud and corruption, inability to deliver services, collusive tendering and insider involvement in contract winners. Five years of exclusion, including the directors of culprit companies, is their lot.

This is most welcome. All these are serious offences with a direct bearing on service delivery, not only in eThekwini but in many other councils throughout KwaZulu-Natal.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

While critics can argue that more companies and their operators in the city should find themselves in the same predicament, the latest action signals a political will to punish corrupt elements.

Mercury readers are familiar with a series of stories published earlier this year about shenanigans among contracted suppliers, where they are paid millions but do not deliver. 

It is companies like these that deserve hard scrutiny. They should be weighed as candidates for blacklisting, and be charged criminally should the facts measure up.

Law-abiding residents and crooks who regard the public purse as easy pickings need a rigid message that ripping off ratepayers will not be tolerated.

It is not enough that individuals lay criminal charges against those under suspicion. The city should pro-actively report such cases to the police, it is the right thing to do.

The blacklisted firms must also be forbidden from making any bids for government 
business. The official tender database, in all spheres of government, has to be aligned to eliminate the common practice where blacklisted firms in eThekwini council simply relocate to other provinces.

While we understand the legal implications involved as some of the companies have appealed, we expect the city to officially publish the names of the firms that have been blacklisted. This will render the process open and transparent - and enable the private sector to consider, too, whether it wants to do any business with such operators.

The barring process should not be used by those in power to fight narrow factional battles, to stymie political opponents. 

With the ANC eThekwini Regional Conference just around the corner, such manipulation may be contemplated. A lot is at stake. Nor should political connectivity be any factor in who is pursued. 

 In principle, the latest 
anti-corruption measures should be encouraged. For far too long shadowy individuals and companies have been allowed to get away with it.
The Mercury