Durban - A DA councillor has vowed to stay away from any committee meetings of his ward, after he was allegedly assaulted by one of the ward committee members during a dispute over an attendance register.
Ward 58 Councillor Geoff Pullan said he was attacked and assaulted by his ward committee secretary, Ziphozonke Mpungose, during a committee meeting  last week.

However, Mpungose has denied the assault allegations. Ward 58 includes areas next to the King Shaka International Airport.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Pullan said his relationship with the ward committee secretary, a member of the ANC, had always been difficult.  Both parties claimed to have reported the matter to the ­office of the speaker.  

Pullan said that on Wednesday there was a meeting with the ward committee members, but many of them did not show up. 

“We could not form a quorum, so I said let us sign a register so that all those present could receive their stipends. He refused to sign the register. He gave me his register to sign and I signed it and put it in my folder,” said Pullan.

He said Mpungose demanded the register back, and tried to forcefully take it from him. 

“As  I stood up, he bashed me against the wall, twice.” 

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said the matter has also been reported to the speaker’s office, adding that  Pullan had requested that the committee be dissolved.

Mpungose rejected claims that he assaulted Pullan. 

“He stole my register and put it in his file. We struggled over the file, and when I let go of the file, he fell forward and he hit himself against the window and the wall.”

Mpungose said the relationship between the structure and the councillor had always been bad. 

“We were appointed last year, but to date the ward committee has never been introduced to the public. He has told us on numerous occasions that he does not recognise this structure,” he said.

“We have written to the speaker complaining about the manner the councillor is treating the ward committee,” said Mpungose.  

Captain Nqobile Gwala said the police were investigating a case of common assault. “Investigations are continuing.”

Graham said they were concerned about the safety of DA councillors, as they found themselves in increasingly dangerous situations in eThekwini and the province as a whole, and that this matter required urgent attention by both the city and the SAPS.

Last Sunday, DA councillor in uMhlathuze Sihle Magubane was assaulted and choked by ANC members in an altercation over a double-booked hall.
The Mercury