Durban - eThekwini Municipal mayor, Zandile Gumede, officially launched the city's customer service roadshow in Bridge City on Saturday. The roadshows was initiated as a pilot in February this year which saw in excess of 800 customers being attended to successfully. Last week roadshows were held at Pavillion, Gateway and Phoenix Plaza with more than 1200 customers being attended to. Gumede had mobilised the city’s customer service units to go to the people as a response to the numerous complaints received via her Mayoral Hotline launched earlier in the year. 
Speaking at the launch, Gumede said they have decided to reach out to the public, especially those customers who are unable to come to our offices during the week. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"The decision to bring our services to our people is in keeping with our commitment to our Batho Pele Principles and in response to the numerous complaints received from our customers regarding their bills. These roadshows will allow consumers to speak to municipal officials face-to-face and raise any service issues or concerns," she said. 
Gumede said the city wants to give customers the opportunity to be able to engage with staff from revenue, water, electricity, Sizakala Customer Care and the City Integrity and Investigation Unit, who are onsite and online during these roadshows.
During the roadshows customers will be able to raise any utility service related query, update information, register on eServices and make payment arrangements for any outstanding accounts. Customers may also apply for a rates rebate should they qualify or simply check if their current account is in order. 

The following services will be on offer:

Revenue: Accounts enquiries, consolidations, Transfers, Terminations, Credit Authorities and Rebates to senior citizens

Water: Accounts inquiries, Meter readings queries .Water leaks and registration of water services

Electricity: Accounts enquiries, meter readings and checking of applications status

Sizakala: Any other municipal related services enquiries and employment application forms among other services that will be on offer.

This weekend the roadshows were held at Bridge City, Galleria Mall and Musgrave Mall. On the weekend of 9 and 10 June patrons of Chatsworth Centre, Hammersdale Mall and both Mega City and kwaMnyandu Mall will get a chance to liaise with customer service officials.

“We encourage our customers to pay their bills. While the Municipality continues to implement rigorous debt control measures to recover the R9.2 billion debt owed to the City as at the end of March 2018, customers who are in arrears have been encouraged to pay their debt. We are encouraging big business, home owners including government institutions to pay their debt," the mayor said. 
Gumede added that the city will be introducing more measures of debt relief for the poor but their stance is that people must pay. 
"We are here to say to those who received wrong bills, lets deal with this matter once and for all. There is nothing for Mahhala," she said. 
The Mercury