The Department of Labour is pinning its hopes on President Cyril Ramaphosa signing into law the national minimum wage in August or September.
This is according to the ­department’s director-general, Thobile Lamati.

“We were hoping that today (yesterday) we were going to implement the national minimum wage, but unfortunately due to parliamentary processes we are unable to do so,” Lamati said yesterday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is a question of finalising a few issues that are part of parliamentary processes, and we hope from now until, maybe August or September, the president will be able to ­announce the implementation of the ­national minimum wage,” Lamati said.

On April20, the labour portfolio committee referred the national minimum wage and other labour bills to the department for redrafting after some issues were raised via written and oral submissions.

Lamati said the department was due to go back to Parliament this week.

“The portfolio committee has to go through the bill clause by clause to satisfy ­itself that everything they said must be redrafted has been ­redrafted,” he added.

However, the national minimum wage and the labour bills do not feature in the portfolio committee’s agenda for Wednesday.

Derrick America, a committee member, said it was ­envisaged that the national minimum wage and other ­labour bills would be considered by the committee from next week.

Labour Department spokesperson Teboho Thejane said the department had integrated the written and oral submissions into the draft bills.

Thejane said the labour bills would be sent to Parliament this week, and they would follow committee processes before they were discussed by MPs.

Lamati said that once the committee was through with the bills, they would go to the National Assembly and thereafter the National Council of Provinces.

Lamati described the ­national minimum wage as a huge stride forward, saying it would uplift a lot of workers who were in different sectors.

However, Numsa and the South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) have ­labelled the national minimum wage a “slavery wage”.

This was rubbished by ­Cosatu in the Western Cape when it marched to hand over a memorandum to Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula outside Parliament.

Cosatu said the national minimum wage was an ­important step in the right ­direction.
The Mercury