Durban - Embattled Msunduzi Municipality has allegedly been placed under “technical administration” following the arrival of an intervention team from national government this week, according to opposition parties.
Officials from the National Treasury and provincial Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Department arrived on Tuesday to implement a “financial recovery plan”.

They are experts in budgeting, supply chain and finance, among other fields.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

On Tuesday they met councillors who sit in the finance portfolio committee and yesterday met senior administrative officials.

Opposition party councillors have described the team’s presence as a “technical administration” as no formal announcement about placing the municipality under administration had been made.

The councillors said when a municipality was placed under administration, there were three phases - intervention, then administration, and then the council is dissolved if the first two fail to produce results. 

However, Cogta and the council denied this, saying the team was there to assist the municipality.

The team’s visit comes barely a month after the municipality’s audit committee members briefed exco members on the state of the municipality. 

The committee is made up of external experts. 

“The committee said the state of the municipality was such that if there was an audit opinion worse than a disclaimer, that is the opinion that the auditor-general would express. 

“Even the issues that the AG had raised in the previous audit had not been addressed,” said the source. 

DA councillor Jerome Majola said the arrival of local government experts was an intervention though it had not been stated outright. 

“They (Cogta) are concerned with the political implications. At least one of the people leading the meeting stated as much, saying they were concerned about the impact (problems in the municipality) would have in the 2019 elections.” 

IFP councillor Thinasonke Ntombela echoed Majola’s sentiments. “This is an intervention, this team is meeting department heads today. They (Cogta) are just avoiding to announce that the municipality is under administration.”

Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said the team was there to assist the municipality in developing a financial recovery plan. “This entails strengthening the council’s ability to enhance revenue collection, improve processes and systems to increase efficiency and thereby improve service delivery.” 

Cogta spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the municipality was not under administration. 

“These allegations on social media that Cogta is doing nothing while the municipality is facing difficulty are not true. 

“MEC Nomusa Dube-
Ncube is working very hard to assist the municipality and all other municipalities to ensure they perform their service delivery functions optimally,” Mayisela said.
The Mercury