The DA is piling pressure on the National Assembly committee on justice to institute proceedings to remove Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane.
This follows a complaint to the programming committee yesterday, that despite months of trying to get the committee to set up the inquiry, this has not happened. 

House chairperson Cedric Frolick and ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu said they expected a response from the committee soon.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

DA chief whip John Steenhuisen said he had been urging the committee to set up the inquiry, but its chairperson, Mathole Motshekga, had not responded to the request.

Steenhuisen said he wanted to make presentations to the justice committee on why they wanted Mkhwebane to be removed from office.

“Deputy Speaker (Lechesa Tsenoli), I wrote a letter in terms of the Public Protector Act in which I requested an inquiry into the fitness of the Public Protector, and it’s been several months. I don’t think the committee should have the authority over it because of the gravity of the matter,” Steenhuisen said. He requested the programming committee to ask Motshekga when he would launch the inquiry.

Frolick said he raised the issue with Motshekga, and the justice committee chairperson would give him a report next week. 

Motshekga could not be reached for comment yesterday.

This is the second time that the DA had tabled a motion in Parliament to remove Mkhwebane.

This followed her reports into CIEX, hired to probe the government’s bailout of Bankorp, which was subsequently absorbed into Absa, in which the North Gauteng High Court in Pretoria ruled against her. Recently, she was challenged by the DA and the Council for the Advancement of the SA Constitution to review the Estina dairy project report.

This was on the basis that it was shoddy and had left out former Free State premier Ace Magashule and former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane.

Zwane, who is facing his own inquiry in Parliament on the Guptas, was the Agriculture MEC in the Free State when the farm was awarded to the Gupta family. The matter is now the subject of court proceedings.

In her last appearance in Parliament Mkhwebane told the justice committee of a mounting legal bill against her.

These included personal court orders against her amounting to millions of rand.

The justice committee also lambasted her on the increasing legal bill in her office which stood at more than R15million.

R8m was spent in the CIEX report where she lost the 
case against the SA Reserve Bank, Absa and the National Treasury.