OPINION - The ascendancy of the National Party 70 years ago brought 
into power a party that sought 
to consolidate white privilege and the exclusion of black people from the mainstream.
Right from the beginning, the party was preoccupied with developing and promoting Afrikanerdom as a response to British history in South Africa and thus sought to redefine the country in their own image.

As a result, this period gave birth 
to business behemoths such as Sanlam, Naspers, Rembrandt, Volkskas and many others. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This is because the NP’s intention was for Afrikaners to predominate politically, but also to use their economic power to sustain themselves through the ages.

Among the legacies of this history is an economy that has the highest wealth gap in the world and one stratified along class and racial lines. This movement towards white hegemony has seen the destruction of African history, culture and traditions of indigenous people. 

Everywhere it went, it uprooted the spiritual basis of the Khoi and San, the Xhosas, the Sothos, the Zulus and all the peoples it found in its way.

Roots

Every budgeting exercise is about correcting this history, narrowing the gap between the haves and have nots. It is also about reclaiming our roots as an African country in a modern world.

Coincidentally, in the year the National Party won power, the royal house of King Cyprian kaDinizulu was blessed with a son in the same year of his coronation. That son was none other than His Majesty Isilo Samabandla Goodwill kaBhekuzulu.

We say with certainty that his birth in 1948, was a blessing in times of uncertainty. 

In contrast to the rise of the National Party which brought darkness and misery for black people, the birth of His Majesty provided hope as a symbol of unity for our people. 

We continue to congratulate Isilo for receiving an honorary doctorate from the University of Zululand this past weekend. In our view, the award was for keeping, protecting and promoting the traditions of his forefathers and his people as 
monarch of KwaZulu-Natal. It was for serving as a centre in times of division and conflict.

As the longest-serving king of our people, Isilo has undergone massive political changes. Of importance, His Majesty has told us this should not ever lead to the erosion of values that are fundamental to the institution of royalty.

Over the years, therefore, we have seen His Majesty play a leading role in the preservation of our African identity, culture, language and traditions. We also understand His Majesty’s appreciation of our complex society. 

We recall in 1973, when according to the Ingonyama Trust, His Majesty successfully brokered workplace peace between workers and employers at Corobrick in Durban.

It will be remembered that this was a period during which black trade unions were banned.

The Ingonyama Trust reminds us 
further that in 1989, His Majesty also brokered peace between commercial farmers and their employees at Louwsburg near Vryheid in what was called the Ngoje Accord.

In the democratic era, His Majesty remains outside politics. In that way he allows the constitutional state to evolve through the will of the majority. 

We consider the return of virginity testing and male circumcision as 
key interventions in efforts to return 
morality and to win the battle against HIV and Aids. 

His Majesty has also played a leading role in the promotion of basic education and has become a permanent guest at our matric results announcement each year. We are also deeply indebted to His Majesty as a symbol of unity across the ideological divide.

We will continue supporting efforts to accord the institution economic and financial independence. This we believe will help maintain the dignity and decorum around the royal household.

We have heard His Majesty’s calls for us to return to our founding values of ubuntu, respect and honesty. His Majesty has encouraged us to till the land for food security. Isilo has called for hands on deck so we can defeat poverty and unemployment. The honour bestowed on His Majesty by the University of Zululand is a fitting tribute to the people of KwaZulu-Natal and the African diaspora in the Americas, the Caribbean and elsewhere. It tells us as the government that we are on the right track in our relations with His Majesty.

This year’s allocation to the royal household is a result of historic under-
allocation to the maintenance requirements of the royal palaces.

His Majesty’s budget reflects not only inflationary pressures, but the growing engagements and traditional ceremonies that Isilo will be involved in during 2018/2019.

In closing, we presented a total budget of R787.137million for the Office of the Premier. Out of this R274.434m is for policy and governance while institutional development has been allocated R410.377m. Administration received R102m. 

This budget caters for poverty alleviation and radical socio-economic transformation. It provides for women, youth, democracy programmes and provincial communication. It caters for transversal services such as the KZN Planning Commission which is among the best in the country and Operation Sukuma Sakhe, the award-winning regular community engagement programme. 

Among others, this budget provides for the director-general of the province, the Public Service Academy and the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Through these Budgets, we hope to 
deracialise our province and create a 
new one that delivers infrastructure and services to everyone no matter where they live. Across the board, we aim to do so without wastage or corruption, but effectively and efficiently.



*  Mchunu is Premier of 
KwaZulu-Natal and a member of the Provincial Interim Committee of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal. He is writing in response to the article, “Zulu king’s budget increased by R7m”, published in The Mercury on May 4