EDITOR'S VIEW - Few days pass, nowadays, without a racial incident. Some are seen as they happen, others via complainants airing their injury in this and other newspapers or on social media, and some surface in court rulings.
With every one comes a sense of dismay - that the reconciliation and Rainbow Nation phase that washed warmly through this country under Nelson Mandela’s leadership did not achieve nearly as much change in attitudes 
as we had hoped.

There are blatant offences, there are borderline cases. There are sly acts that are cruelly intended to destroy the spirit of another of different colour, background or persuasion. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

That there are old attitudes, there is no doubt. A lot of them. One only has to visit a rural village, say, to discern that apartheid lives on in many, largely unseen, ways.

One does not even have to go that far - some of the most infamous incidents have occurred in our towns and cities. And they have been recorded by ubiquitous, ready cellphone enthusiasts.
Also read: Willemse saluted as hero

Regular though they are, every incident is a reason for disappointment and condemnation. 

Such lamentable moments harden views, serving to confirm prejudices against others - one way or the other. The moment they happen, lines are drawn and argument starts - often along racial lines. Wounds reopen, some would say they never closed.

Each incident is thus terribly damaging to this country. Even when the facts are not fully known, supposition turns into fact, often guided by the individual’s background and inclination. There is attack, there is defence - neither of which address how this country is going to extract itself from this historic mire.

The upset involving rugby analyst and accomplished Springbok, Ashwin Willemse, is an instance of citizens opining before we fully know what happened in that SuperSport studio on Saturday evening.

First word was that it had to do with Willemse being associated with “quota” players, and thus denigrated.

In the minds of some, fellow analysts Naas Botha and Nick Mallett were guilty of racism. Others differed, believing Willemse had dealt badly with the flare-up.

Both points of view were quickly aired. Too quickly, for an exchange with such serious consequences.

Guided by previous incidents, or personal prejudice they have experienced, they somehow seem to know what passed. 

If Botha and Mallett were racist, are guilty of racial undermining, they are not worthy as public commentators. Grave consequences should be theirs. 

If they belittled Willemse, without racist innuendo, they should apologise to him promptly and publicly. We need to know the facts, which SuperSport must divulge when it knows them.
The Mercury