COMMENT - It takes courage to get up each morning and find our way to work with so much happening all around us. I have been promoted to deep reflection by the  recent murder of the previous dean and head of the School of Education at UKZN. Justifiably, there has been a surge in calls for decolonisation, land redistribution and equality. But there has been a notable silence throughout the country on an issue that might be far more serious.
How can any of these issues be addressed if lawlessness prevails? Crime has become endemic to the extent that it could be classified as uncontrollable. 

Rhetoric from politicians fails to include serious crime and daily disruptive protest actions. Lives are lost, work productivity is hampered, and soon businesses will close as a result of loss of revenue. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Education is hampered because students cannot commute to schools and universities. Examinations are under threat because buses and taxis are continuously delayed by service delivery action. 

The idea of burning has infiltrated academic institutions.Where are the voices that are so quick to issue statements that will win them political favour? 

Why aren’t there pressure groups being formed to take the government and municipalities to court to protect the innocent (tax-paying) population from criminal behaviour?
Also read: Apartheid no crime against humanity, says AfriForum's Kriel

When councillors were killed, a commission was set up to investigate the political killings, but people die daily because of rampant and serious crime. Why is it that the lives of the victims of crime are not deemed important? 

Crucial questions need to be asked. 

Who takes responsibility for the deaths of so many innocent people? Protection of all citizens is enshrined in the constitution, and we need to question why the constitution gets discussed on selected issues but not when the quality of the lives of the poor, innocent citizens of the country are at stake.

Who should assume responsibility for daily protest actions? These protest actions seem to be localised around informal settlements. Who are the proprietors of such informal settlements? Who allowed them to mushroom in a way that endangers the lives of the inhabitants of these informal settlements? Recent fires in the Clare Estate and Bottlebrush settlements caused by illegal electrical connections are examples. 

Moreover, taxpayers are forking out enormous amounts of money in order to repair damaged property - including the resurfacing of roads.

We hear over the bush telegraph that the SAPS cannot control crime and protest action. So why has the relatively inactive SANDF not been summoned to protect all South Africans? It worked well during the soccer world cup in 2010.

There seems to be an underlying third, fourth or fifth force in action. Why do these protest actions suddenly flare up and die down within a few hours, only to re-ignite elsewhere? 

Does this play into the hands of some group of people that benefit economically, politically or socially? Perhaps we should appoint our 100th commission to conduct a thorough investigation and report back to us in three years’ time. Or we could enforce the law, arrest the perpetrators, and deploy the SANDF to troubled areas. 

I’m not sure whether the government is aware of it or not but there has been a surge in hijackings, cash-in-transit crimes, house break-ins and other serious crime. The poor, neglected township communities seem to be affected most by criminal activities. We can hide and convey the false impression that all is well or we can take the bull by the horns and turn our country around. 

When will good citizens be able to travel safely to work on trains, buses and taxis? When will road users be punished so that they are forced to abide by the rules that govern the country? When will taxi drivers be trained to become courteous and to observe safety? Or, when will taxi owners and drivers realise that this is a free market and no one owns the route or road? When will motorists be taught to stop at the red robots? When will children be taught that bullying is bad? 

Every crime (no matter how small) will lead to another. 

On this continent, South Africa stands aloof because we have a beautiful country, but what have we got to show for it? 

Tourists are killed or robbed regularly. Certain areas are no-go areas. Xenophobia rears its ugly head regularly. Government departments struggle to remain efficient. 

When will the government stop, reflect and act? Is this a difficult task? Are we afraid to do what is right because we play to the gallery that only values certain types of rhetoric or actions? 

When will a brave leader emerge and save the country from a certain and horrible death?

We are no longer a young democracy (we’ve had 24 years of experience already). Passing the horrid teens was difficult but we did well. Now is the time to consolidate and grow beyond our past and develop a national unity. 

Imagine how disconcerting it must be for citizens of the US who are constantly plagued by racism, violence and - recently - what seems to be undemocratic behaviour, despite more than 200 years of independence. We are the standard that all countries should seek to emulate. But how will we attain this if we cannot self-reflect and self-correct. 

So, let us try. 

Each one of us. Let us find the joys of real freedom. Political freedom is just the start. Real freedom comes with deep reflective practice. 

Let us teach our children to be good, to do good, to be kind, to be tolerant, to adapt, adjust and accommodate. 

These are the simple values that ensure productive people. Productive people create functional communities. Functional communities produce successful countries. Let us change ourselves today so that we can teach our children to become better for tomorrow. 

Together we are so powerful that no other force can subjugate us. We can only conquer if we stand tall, shoulder-to-shoulder. We are the force that the destabilising forces have to contend with. We shall overcome!



*  Professor Mudaly is an associate professor of the School of Education at the University of KwaZulu-Natal. He has penned this piece in his personal capacity