Durban - The Msunduzi Municipality is apparently in such an embattled state that opposition party councillors have recommended that money set aside for councillor salary increases this financial year, be used for service delivery.
The municipality tabled its budget for the 2018-19 financial year during an exco meeting on Thursday. It will be approved by full council next week.

The overall operating budget revenue is R5.031billion, the overall operating expenditure is R4.914billion and grants and subsidies amount to R1.013billion for 2018/19. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The councillors were to ­receive a pay hike and benefits of around 7.5% of their current structure. But the increase is based on the performance of the municipality.

“Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube gave a directive that councillors of poor performing ­municipalities shouldn’t ­receive any increase. We ­received a disclaimer for the previous financial year and did not get any increase.

“Considering how things are going this year, we are heading for another dis­claimer. We recommended that the money for councillors should rather be directed to service delivery,” said DA councillor Jerome Majola. 

He added that they had voted against the budget ­because they were concerned about a number of issues, ­including high water and electricity tariff increases. 

“The electricity tariff is at 6.8%. That is not unreasonably high, but it is still high. The water tariff, at around 13%, is very high. 

“The National Treasury circular directs that increases should be close to the inflation rate, which is at 6%.

“We feel that it is important to charge rates that will speak to our customers,” said Majola.

He said it was important for the municipality to focus on collecting its debts, rather than increasing tariffs. 

“We have the Vulindlela area, which makes up around 40% of Msunduzi residents. Residents there are charged a flat rate of R90 on water, which is a problem because it results in losses in water.  

“In other townships, people have illegal electricity connections, which is costing the municipality money. Auditing both electricity and water ­meters should be a priority,” he said. 

Majola said they were also concerned that there was no alignment between the budget and the integrated development plan (IDP). 

“For instance, in one of the townships a road is being built, yet its not on the IDP. We are also concerned that the ­municipality is failing to fill thousands of jobs that are budgeted for,” he said.

IFP councillor Thinasonke Ntombela said Cogta should review the policy on collective punishment of councillors when a municipality fails. 

“They should focus on councillors who push through incorrect decisions. If the opposition objects, but the decision is pushed through, the councillors responsible should be punished.” 

Municipal spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said the budget would focus on priority areas, including the capping of electricity and water losses, replacement of dilapidated infrastructure, elimination of water and electricity theft and debt collection. 
The Mercury