Durban - The family of a woman who was killed in an attack on a Kwa­Zulu-Natal farm last month have applauded the task team who ensured the ­arrests and conviction of the men responsible.
Smangaliso ­Michael Mayela, 21, Nkosinathi Ngcobo, 20, and Odwa Zide, 21, were sentenced to 40 years' imprisonment in the Durban Regional Court on Thursday. 

The trio pleaded guilty to charges of murder, attempted murder, robbery and unlawful possession of a firearm. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In April, the men entered the home of Virathapushanam and Steve Govender in oThongathi in northern KZN.

Govender was tied up and suffocated while her husband was found bleeding, but conscious.
Also read: Farm murderers had been offered food by slain victim

He had been stabbed in the forehead and hit on the head with a blunt object and had lain in the kitchen bleeding for several hours unaware that his wife had been killed in one of the bedrooms of the home. 

Steve was found in the early hours of the next day by neighbours. By the time the neighbours entered the house, they found Steve in the kitchen, bleeding profusely, with his hands and legs tied with a telephone cable. He was unable to move.

Zide had worked for the couple on their farm. 

In court, the couple’s daughter, Dr Yuvashnee Govender, a cardiologist based in Pietermaritzburg, said her parents were happily married.

“They lived independently
and they refused the state’s (pension) grant even though they were entitled to it. 

“My mum contributed to society, to charity drives to uplift society. She cooked delicious meals. She helped dad with the daily (farm/market) business and took care of the house.
She will be sadly missed at the market. 

“When the poor approached her she would give them extra vegetables or lower the prices. My mother was an honest, God-fearing individual. She installed the values of honesty in us that we still carry today,” she said. 

Yuvashnee said the attack had been heartbreaking as her parents were defenceless and would have pleaded for their lives. 

“These are ruthless criminals who had clear intentions. They robbed us of a mother, they robbed my father of his wife, and a family of their sister,” Yuvashnee said. 

The couple’s nephew, Clyde Pillay, said the sentencing of the men brought closure for the family. 

“We must thank the task team. They were amazing,” he said. 

Pillay went on to thank friends and family who stood by them during the difficult time. 
The Mercury