Durban - For Durban-based snake expert, Nick Evans, there is no such thing as a “typical day at the office”. And a call out this week to a home in oThongathi on the KwaZulu-Natal north coast was no different. However, this particular rescue was something for the Evans' history books.

Speaking to The Mercury, Evans said he received a call from a home in Sundial Avenue.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Having been called out to the residence twice before, Evans was told a mamba had been seen in the roof of the outbuilding.

“Upon arrival, I used a Figtree as a ladder and climbed up onto the roof. A youngster, named Sibonelo, bravely assisted me in keeping an eye on the snake’s movement. I was on the roof, hitting holes through it with a hammer, trying to get a visual of the snake. Of course, every time I smashed a hole in, the mamba would move. I ended up smashing holes almost in a circle, all around me. This became unnerving, as I was not sure where it may pop up” Evans said.

He said while he was chasing the snake around, Sibonelo spotted a Monitor Lizard or Likkewaan.
Nick Evans with a Monitor Lizard found at a home in oThongathi on Tuesday. 
Picture: Nick Evans


“I could not see it. Until at one point, I watched the large mamba move over it,” he said.

Evans said Monitor Lizards are known to feed on snakes.

“However, this sub-adult Monitor would have no chance of taking on this large mamba. I found it fascinating that they were together. Both frequently become residents in ceilings, as it is warm and safe in there, plus there is usually rats around for them to feed on. They had each other for competition. Yet, neither of them seemed phased by the other,” he said.

After an hour, Evans said he managed to grab the snake’s tail and a head popped out of one of the other holes he had made in the roof earlier.

“I then pinned her head down, secured her, and got her in a bucket. Sibonelo rushed to get my other bucket, while I attempted to catch the Monitor. The Monitor was hiding in the corner where I had found the mamba. It was beneath a beam and the wall. I had to break some of the roofing to get it out, but eventually did so. When Sibonelo climbed back up to hand me a bucket, he looked into the roof,” Evans said.

He said Sibonelo alerted him to a problem - a second mamba.

“It was about a metre from where my hands were, pulling the monitor out. It was pretty much near where I was standing. I could not believe it. Without a third bucket, I had to quickly release the monitor into the large patch of bush bordering the property, and kept the second bucket for the next mamba. It took some time for me to actually corner it, but I soon managed and I had it restrained,” he said.

A startled Evans said he had never had this experience before.

"Three large reptiles in one roof. It is mamba mating season at the moment so that is why the two snakes were together. The bigger of the two is at least 2.5m, whilst the smaller one is around 2.2m. I suspect the smaller one is the male. Both of them will be released together in a much more suitable location, away from people," Evans said. 

The Mercury