Durban - The president of the National 
Funeral Practitioners Association of SA was released on bail after handing himself over to police in connection with a murder case.
Speaking to The Mercury yesterday, Muzi Hlengwa said he was granted R2000 bail on Friday. 

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele confirmed that the 44-year-old appeared in the Durban Magistrate’s Court for the alleged kidnapping and murder of Thanduxolo Mkhize, 28. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“He was allegedly assaulted and had head injuries. He was taken to hospital where he died on arrival,” said Mbhele. 

Hlengwa said while it saddened him that a person had died, he was not responsible. 

The last time he had seen 
Mkhize - who he claims was a known whoonga addict and troublemaker - the man had been surrounded by a mob of fed-up community members. 

He alleged Mkhize and his accomplices had broken into his Chesterville home two weeks ago and stolen his belongings. 

“They came back some days later while we were sleeping. My wife saw them with my son who has albinism and screamed. I woke up and chased after them but they got away,” said Hlengwa. 

Last Tuesday, when he returned home from taking his three children aged between 3 and 12 to school, he discovered that his home had been ransacked again. 

“This time we caught one and he told us where my stuff was. I then drove off to find my belongings while the community 
surrounded him,” said Hlengwa. 

His search was unsuccessful. Later he received a phone call from police, telling him that Mkhize had died. 

“I was not there, I had no idea what had happened to him.”

Hlengwa said they agreed that he would come in on Thursday, which he did and was arrested and held at the Cato Manor police station overnight. 

‘I bury, I don’t kill’

“I went there because I had nothing to hide. I was not there. Regardless of whether my name is associated with this or not, a person has died and that hurts me. I bury people I don’t kill them,” said Hlengwa. 

Hlengwa said he would not jeopardise his business, family and relations with his community by committing the crime, especially not in retaliation for having been a victim of crime. 

“It is my duty to protect my wife and children so when I find a stranger in my house I chase him away. I didn’t know that the community would beat him and he would die.”

Mkhize’s mother, Thobekile Mkhize, questioned why Hlengwa had not attempted to speak to her about her son’s behaviour. 

“I’m still asking myself why he did not come in and talk to me about what my son did.”

She said her son had recently been released from prison after serving a three-year sentence for theft. Hlengwa is due back in court in July and no other arrests have been made in connection with Mkhize’s death. 
The Mercury