Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs has made damning admissions of major shortcomings in the ­management of air quality in the province.
Released by MEC Sihle Zikalala on Sunday, the report reveals that there is a lack of adequate air quality data due to an absence of infrastructure, and that air quality management plans are non-existent in the majority of KZN municipalities.

The report notes that Air Quality Management Plans (AQMPs) have not yet been developed for iLembe, uMkhanyakude, Harry Gwala, uMgungundlovu, uThu­kela, uMzinyathi and Zululand district municipalities, but are being implemented in the King Cetshwayo and Ugu municipalities.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It warns that if the situation is allowed to continue unabated, this could result in a heavy burden of disease for some vulnerable communities, mainly those residing  near big industries, busy road networks and in informal settlements.

In the latest KZN Environment Outlook Report, the department cites “limited political will” and “a non-strategic approach to air quality management”, as some of the challenges stalling progress in this area.

These “limitations” may result in unrestricted growth of sectoral emissions, while “limited monitoring makes it easier for ambient air quality standard exceedances to slip by,” it warns.

Some of the diseases said to be caused or exacerbated by air ­pollutants include strokes, heart disease, lung cancer and both chronic and acute respiratory ­diseases, including asthma.

A study quoted in the report had found that persistent asthma was observed among 12% of ­children in the south of Durban, and was higher in the south than in the north.

“Marked airway hyper-responsiveness is a marker of significant asthma, and was shown to be three times higher in the south than in the north.”

Addressing the media yesterday, Zikalala said his department would improve data coverage and reporting for ambient air quality concentration across the province.

“To meet air quality goals, air quality management plans should be developed for all district muni­cipalities,” he said.

Director of Environmental Services at the department Zama Mathenjwa said the process of drafting the provincial Air Quality Management plan was expected to start after June this year. 

It is envisaged that the process may take about a year-and-a half to two years.

Zikalala is expected to unveil a more detailed plan on how the en­vironmental challenges will be tackled when he delivers his department’s 2018/19 budget next week.

He said it was critical for the province to strike a balance ­between the pursuit of industrialisation and the protection of the environment. 

He said nitrogen dioxide had become a “new and emerging pollutant of interest”. This pollutant resulted from the growth in the transportation sector. 

The report also looks at sulphur dioxide, particulate matter10 (PM10) concentration in KZN. Apart from gaseous pollutants, air can be polluted by particles known as PM10, which are very small, measured in micrometres, and are easily inhalable.

It notes that  elevated PM10 concentrations were observed in most major urban centres. 

In eThekwini, Particulate Matter10 “shows a trend toward higher concentrations in traffic-influenced monitoring sites, at City Hall and Ganges”.

The Department of Environmental Affairs stated in a 2016 report that “PM10 is still the greatest national cause for concern in terms of air quality”.

However, the report notes that sulphur dioxide continues to decrease in central Durban, but that concentrations in Pietermaritzburg showed “a marked increase”. 

Environmental activists said while it was a good thing that the government was now admitting to these shortcomings, it needed to come up with a clear plan on how the situation would be dealt with.

Desmond De Sa, the co-ordinator of the environmental justice organisation South Durban Community Environmental Alliance (SDCEA), said the report was late, and that air pollution had increased significantly because of the lack of monitoring and enforcement.

De Sa said in Durban the problem was that no credible data could  be found. 

“We used to get credible data on air pollution, and we had highly trained pollution officers, but that suddenly stopped in 2009.”

De Sa said his organisation had been spending about R60 000 a year to do its own monitoring, which includes collecting air samples and getting them analysed. What they had since found was that there was a worrying increase in the level of benzene in some parts of the city. 

This was said to be coming from car emissions and from some of the industries in the south.

De Sa was among the group that worked on the Air Quality Management Plan for eThekwini, which he says has never seen the light of day. 

“It is on somebody’s desk gathering dust. We have never seen the final report.”

Bobby Peek, the director of groundWork, said while it should be “positively acknowledged that they admit there is a problem, going forward I would like them to give us a detailed plan with time-frames, budgets and support staff.”
The Mercury