Durban - KwaZulu-Natal is facing a critical blood shortage. With less than two days supply, the province's health MEC is urging people to heed the call and donate blood. 
Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo has rolled up his sleeve to donate and is challenging more locals to do the same. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
People in urgent need of regular blood supply may include mothers giving birth, cancer patients, people involved in road crashes, and patients who suffer complications during major surgery.

KZN regional marketing director at the South African National Blood Services, Sifiso Khoza, said the organisation is concerned that blood donors have not been donating enough blood lately.

“We currently only have blood that is enough to last 1,3 days. People just do not donate. We are not quite sure why, and it has taken us by surprise. We do not know what went wrong. The situation is critical. We are appealing to residents of KwaZulu-Natal – active donors, potential donors and lapsed donors – to help to bolster the regional blood stock," he said. 
Although all blood types are needed, blood group-O is in demand as it is universal and can be transferable to all patients in need.

MEC Dhlomo, who is a blood-O donor, is moved by the plight of the SANBS, and has urged all South Africans who are eligible to step forward and help save lives.

Seaking while donating blood at Umlazi Megacity last week, Dhlomo said he was concerned when he was informed about the province's low blood stocks. 
"It always serves as a timely reminder for me to honour my appointment to donate blood. I would wish that all of us who are already regular blood donors can remember and honour the days of our appointments. We are not meeting the required levels, and that is extremely concerning. So we are calling upon other South Africans who are not yet regular blood donors to come forward and assist us. Every South African between the ages of 16 and 65; who is in good health and whose blood is considered safe to really come forward and assist. Donating blood is a gift of life. You give someone else a chance to live, and live better. I urge all of us to try our best to do that,” he said.  

Regular blood donor Nozipho Cebekhulu (25), from Umlazi, who was also donating blood at the Megacity, echoed the MEC’s sentiments. 
"Donating blood is a gift that no money can buy. If I can save or prolong another person’s life with my blood, I think that’s more than any gift that I can give to another person.  Tomorrow, you might need blood and find that there’s not enough. That should be enough motivation for all of us to stand up and go and donate blood,” she said.

The Mercury