OPINION - Cultural myopia is unacceptable in a world where communication is narrowing the gap on a daily basis between people and their religious and social practices. And yet, academics teaching students of all hues and cultures struggle with the challenge of knowing or getting to know their students.
The recent incident of a UCT student who sought permission from her lecturer to break her fast during her examination is a case in point. 

When he answered thus: “By breaking your fast do you mean a 5-course meal followed by dessert, or a snack?” he displayed a gross insensitivity to the student’s religious and cultural background and inadvertently trivialised her beliefs.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It was clear fasting was a practice completely foreign to his experience. 

His inner thoughts possibly went something like this: Now why would anyone want to fast when they are writing exams? 

Unfamiliar with the sanctity of her religious beliefs, he may never have known the extent of her commitment to her religion. 

I recall once trying to dissuade a student who wanted leave to go on Haj in the midst of her exams. 

“But what about your studies,” I asked, and her expression was one of total shock. 

“What could be more important than Haj?” she retorted.

On another occasion I was told unequivocally by another student that I could not possibly ever understand the concept of a spiritual calling because it was alien to my culture. 

When she wanted to abandon her 5th-year medical degree to follow a spiritual calling, I joined her parents in encouraging her to ­complete her medical studies before abandoning it.

To the psychologist, her disorientated, hallucinatory behaviour spelt psychosis.

Understanding our students is central to the teaching and learning process. In this respect the university or any institution of higher learning cannot function in a vacuum. 

As an integral part of the wider community it must be responsive to social and cultural needs of all its students equally.

When a UCT lecturer allowed some students to miss a class test scheduled for the same time as a music festival in Darling - if they could supply evidence of having booked for the festival well in advance - he was heavily criticised for being biased towards white cultural interests.

Another colleague questioned whether the lecturer would be consistent in his actions when other cultural events that catered to a different demographic of students clashed with class tests.

Another complaint arose from black students who felt that they were often refused exemptions from tests or assignments after they’d experienced a personal tragedy or been through a traumatic event. 

The institution has also been slammed after a student took to social media saying that Muslim students at UCT struggled because exams were scheduled on Eid across faculties, and the university often said that “we are a secular institution and do not structure exams around religious holidays”.

Research has shown how important a strong, well-balanced ego is to the learning process. 

Students from other cultures whose traditions are not understood or respected can feel marginalised, and this can seriously affect their performance levels.

Diminishes

From a multicultural perspective, students should receive an education that continually affirms human diversity and embraces the history and culture of all students. 

Octavia Paz reminds us “life is plurality, death uniformity. Every view that becomes extinct, every culture that disappears, diminishes the possibility of life.”

When education takes place, every individual - teacher, student or administrator - brings his or her cultural background to that process. 

Unless educators learn to prize and value differences and to view them as resources for learning, neither majority nor minority groups will experience the teaching and learning situations best suited to prepare them to live effectively in a world whose population is characterised by diversity.

Because of Christian national education, non-Christians seem to know more about Christianity than Christians seem to know of their Hindu and Muslim counterparts.

In their schooling, non-Christian children were taught to sing all the anthems and prayers, which they learnt mechanically, without too much fuss or resistance. 

An overlay of vernacular education followed in after-school vernacular classes, and through strong, home-grown education at the laps of mothers and grandparents.

The end result was a multicultural richness that produced a ­generation which straddled many cultures and appreciated the wealth of knowledge from East and West.

For the dominant people, though, their education resulted in a complacency that exposed them to a monocultural world that left them feeling high and mighty about themselves and their culture. 

Those who could match up to their brand of truth were civilised, and those who didn’t were backward, unknowledgeable and uncultured. 

Now in the New South Africa, as we progress into the next millennium, the demands for a richer configuration of cultural knowledge would make demands on old complacencies.

Our present constitution makes allowances for the recognition of other cultural practices, and it is now left to the institutions of 
higher learning to create cultural comfort zones for all its students, and to enrich the knowledge base of others.

Westerners would have to start learning about other cultures steeped in a tradition which they have been unfamiliar with in the past.



*  Rajab is a columnist and the interim chair of the Democracy Development Programme
The Mercury