Durban - South Africa has the highest asthma death rate in the world - according to the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) Detailed Mortality Database - and globally 334 million people are estimated to suffer from asthma.

In light of World Asthma Day on May 1, Cipla Respiratory Marketing Manager, Lisl de Villiers, said that it is once again time for South Africans to be made aware of the burden that this condition places on sufferers. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“It is important to understand that asthma is a long-term disease that can be managed, but not cured. Being able to treat its symptoms and to do everything possible to avoid the likelihood of asthma attacks occurring, is therefore crucial,” de Villiers said. 

She said that this is especially true for children who suffer from asthma. 

“According to the National Asthma Education Programme (NAEP), this condition affects 10 % of children, which is twice as much as the number of adults. When not correctly managed, it may not only impair quality of life, but also a child’s level of self-confidence. Children are also more likely to suffer life-threatening asthma attacks,” she said. 

With this in mind, de Villiers said that parents should still encourage their children to take part in normal, day-to-day activities and remain as independent as possible. 

“Asthma is a condition that sufferers have to live with every day, which is why education should play a central part in managing it. If children understand what their condition is, why they are taking a specific medication and how to use their medication properly, they should be able to lead ordinary lives. There are also storybooks and dedicated webpages that not only give information, but that can help children to deal with the potential emotional impact that asthma may have on them,” de Villiers added. 

She said that individuals concerned about respiratory conditions and symptoms should consult their medical professional for a diagnosis, as well as how best to use their asthma medication and manage their condition.
The Mercury