The much-awaited report on sports transformation has bemoaned the apparent lack of transformation across many sporting codes and warned that white-dominated sporting federations could soon be unsustainable if the trend continues.
Produced by the Eminent Persons Group, a committee tasked with monitoring transformation in sports, and released by Sports Minister Tokozile Xasa Monday, the report notes that there has been significant progress made in codes such as rugby, cricket and netball.

The 388-page report looks at transformation holistically to include the composition of boards of federations, the representation of various race groups in management and coaching structures, and the number of CEOs, among other things. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Basing its arguments on Stats SA statistics, the report warns there are significant demographic shifts being projected, especially in the under-18 population group, and that the various federations have got to adapt to the changes.

“The strategic reality is that population demographic changes are taking place. 

"There should be little doubt that the historical predominant white foundation of a number of sporting codes is shrinking which, if not proactively dealt with, could lead to longer-term sustainability and possible performance-related challenges for a number of codes,” reads the report.

According to the report, growth is projected in the black African population, while a decline is expected in the white population over the next 25years.

The demographic shifts are more pronounced in the category of under-18-year-olds, where the black African component of about 17million (85% of the group) is expected to increase by 24% to 21million. 

The white component of the group of about 1.4million is set to decline by 31% to just under one million. 

Based on the data, the report states that the federations falling in a higher sustainability risk category as a result of largely untransformed male senior teams include bowls, baseball, swimming, tennis and rowing. These codes are yet to meet the targets set out in the transformation charter adopted in 2011.

Xasa said she was happy with the progress made in many sporting codes, as national senior male teams of athletics, cricket, football, volleyball, boxing and table tennis have all achieved the charter’s target, with netball, chess, gymnastics, hockey and rugby “moving in the right direction to achieve this interim milestone”.

“Cricket’s percentage black profile has improved from 45% to 60%, hockey from 20% to 45%, whereas rugby has moved from 34% to 42%, and netball from 37% to 56%,” she said.

SA Rugby Union welcomed the report, with its CEO Jurie Roux saying it showed that rugby is succeeding in the process of transformation.

“Rugby in South Africa needs to continue transforming if it is to survive in our nation’s changing demographic landscape, as the report highlights. It is a business imperative for rugby as well as a high-performance opportunity to access untapped talent.”

The report also found that the coaching structures “remain demographically largely untransformed”. 
The Mercury