Durban - The South African Council of Educators (Sace) will have to face a police probe after criminal charges were opened against it over its failure to vet teachers for sexual offences against children.
The charges were laid in Cape Town yesterday by the DA after the body said, in ­response to parliamentary questions from the party, that it did not have access to the National Child Protection Register and the National Register of Sexual Offences, and therefore could not vet teachers against these registers.

While Sace spokepserson Themba Ndlovu was not available for comment yesterday, the Department of Basic Education criticised the DA for laying the charges.   AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The department’s spokesperson, Elijah Mhlanga, said the move “smells like political point-scoring on such an ­important matter”.

Mhlanga opted not to comment on the charges but added that the department would leave the police to do their work. 

“Sace is an entity established in terms of the Sace Act of 2000. They are in a position to handle all issues affecting them. A more constructive approach would have helped, rather than laying a charge,” Mhlanga said. 

The DA accused Sace of failing to safeguard the rights of pupils against sexual predators lurking in schools across the country.

The party said that its spokesperson on Basic Education, Nomsa Marchesi, and Sonja Boshoff, who is also a member of the DA’s education portfolio committee, laid the charges in terms of Section 47 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act after it was revealed that Sace had allegedly failed to vet teachers who had been granted certification over the past 10 years.

Boshoff said Sace was required, by law, to vet all teachers against the registers before issuing licences.

The national Child Protection Register is a record of all acts of abuse against children where criminal charges have resulted in convictions, and names offenders who are not allowed to work with children. 

The national Register for Sex Offenders records the names of those offenders who have been convicted of a sexual offence against a child or mentally disabled person.

Boshoff said that with the country commemorating Child Protection Week it was ­imperative that teachers were properly vetted and that, if this was not done, Sace’s leadership should be held to account. 

She also said the DA’s laying of charges did not absolve Minister Angie Motshekga of responsibility.

“Sace is an entity of the ­Department of Basic Education, which should have ensured that it was not breaking the law. Minister Motshekga should now prove that her department is committed to ensuring children are safe at schools and support the call the DA has repeatedly made for this through our #SafeSchools campaign,” she said. 

Last year, a teacher at a Durban high school was arrested after he was caught allegedly sending raunchy text messages and explicit photographs to a pupil. The teacher was suspended immediately.

In another case, an Nqutu teacher was arrested after he was found to be allegedly engaging in sexual acts with 
female pupils. 
The Mercury