Durban - EThekwini residents are seemingly struggling to meet their obligations to the municipality as they have been denounced as the biggest culprits contributing to the R9.2billion owed to the municipality by various debtors including businesses and households.
Responding to questions from The Mercury, the city revealed that by March 31 this year, households owed the municipality R6bn of the total amount owed, while businesses owed R2.5bn and various government departments owed the city R592 million.

Of concern is the fact that the lion’s share of the debt is over 90 days old. Of the R6bn household debt, only R1.4bn is current or not older than 90 days, while of the R2.5bn only R1bn is current.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Also read: High municipal bills still dog residents 

Karen Heese, an economist at local government think tank Municipal IQ, said debt over 90 days old is “usually considered unrecoverable”.

She warned that the accumulation of high debt owed to municipalities reduces a municipality’s ability to deliver services “as bad debt starts to take up a portion of the budgets it also potentially compromises the credit rating of the municipality”.

eThekwini is, however, not the worst affected by this, as the latest local government revenue and expenditure report reveals that by December 31, 2017, the City of Johannesburg was owed about twice the amount owed to eThekwini.

“The largest contributors are the City of Johannesburg, which is owed the largest amount at R18.3bn, followed by Ekurhuleni Metro at R14.4bn, City of Tshwane at R10.8bn, and eThekwini at R9.2bn,” states the local report.

The total amount owed to all municipalities stood at R138.2bn, and the report noted that of this only R26bn could be considered to be realistically collectible. 

“This should not be interpreted that the National Treasury by implication suggests that the balance must be written off by municipalities,” stated the report.

Financial pressures

Heese said some of the factors contributing to this problem included poor billing procedures, financially pressed consumers, an ill-functioning indigent system for those who should be registered but are not, and poor collection mechanisms.

She said there are many strategies municipalities could employ to ensure they dig themselves out of the debt.

“First, send out clear political messaging to pay for rates and services, and hold public officials to account for this themselves. 

"Second, clean up systems to ensure bills are accurate and sent to all consumers, engaging consumers who need debt repayment plans and possibly incentivising those who pay early. Third, pursue old debt through debt collection,” she said.

eThekwini deputy head of revenue Philile Madonsela said the City engages in various debt-collection strategies to recoup what is owed to it. “Processes include disconnection of services, red-lining customers with credit bureaus, and taking legal process,” she said.

Independent economist Professor Bonke Dumisa said it was true that due to the current economic conditions, many consumers were struggling as many people were either unemployed or underemployed. However, he said there were other factors contributing to the resistance to pay for rates and services.

“There is a history of non-payment. Remember in 1994, we were resisting paying municipalities? However, now we also have people who are opportunists, who want to have everything but are not willing to pay for anything,” he said.

Dumisa said in some instances municipalities' efforts to cut off services to defaulters were being sabotaged from within. 

“You may disconnect services now but someone will be back to reconnect in the afternoon and so some believe they are untouchable. These are the little things that municipalities need to deal with,” Dumisa said.

Today, Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube will launch the "Pay Your Levies - Nothing 4 Mahhala" campaign which is aimed at encouraging debtors to pay what they owe municipalities.

Delivering her budget statement last week, Dube-Ncube said KwaZulu-Natal municipalities were owed R16bn by various debtors.
The Mercury