Durban - Construction of Go Durban infrastructure has come to a halt in Pinetown after threats were received, allegedly from taxi bosses unhappy with aspects of the development.
This has led to fears that the first route of Durban’s integrated public transport network may not be unveiled this year owing to the delays.

The route, which stretches from the Pinetown CBD to Bridge City in KwaMashu and features a dedicated lane for use by Go Durban buses, was expected to be unveiled later this year and would be the first of the new network to be in use.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
GO!Durban. Station at Wyebank on the MR577
Picture: Supplied


Construction firm Group Five confirmed that work had stopped about two weeks ago and that the stoppage was bound to affect the expected completion time for the project.

“The eThekwini Transport Authority has now suspended the project and all plant equipment has been moved off-site. Employees on the project have been placed on short time,” said Judith Nzimande, Group Five’s chief human resource officer.

Asked if Group Five was worried about the safety of its workers, Nzimande said “safety is always our primary concern” and added that employees would not return to site until the issues had been resolved and the suspension lifted.

Nzimande, however, said Group Five was not involved in the dispute. She said the Pinetown Taxi Association had requested that Group Five stop work on the project as a result of “an issue between themselves and the eThekwini Transport Authority (ETA) over the GO Durban Project.”

However taxi associations operating in the area denied any involvement in the stoppages. 

“There are three associations that will be affected by the C3 Corridor which stretches from Pinetown to Bridge City in KwaMashu. Those are the Pinetown Taxi Association, the Clermont/KwaDabeka Taxi Association and the Molweni-Wyebank Taxi Association. 

“I am the chairperson of the steering committee and I can assure you that none of these associations ever issued any directive for there to be stoppages,” said Bheki Mbambo, chairperson of the Pinetown Taxi Association.

He said there was no way that any of the members of the three associations could have acted individually and stopped the development. He admitted, however, that the taxi owners under the association were unhappy about some elements of the Go Durban project.

“We have a few questions that are unanswered. For example, we see that stations are being built and we are told there are going to be buses operating, but whose buses are those? 

“We also want to know who are the people who are going to be providing security and cleaning services at these stations? 

“We should be part of these things because not only do they affect us directly as people in the transport industry, but we are also community members,” Mbambo said.

He added that the ongoing road construction had impacted on their businesses but emphasised that the three associations he represents had never threatened anyone.

The city’s communication department and eThekwini Transport Authority head Thami Manyathi were contacted for comment last night but no response had been received by the time of publication.
The Mercury