Durban - After being beaten by her husband, a Pietermaritzburg nurse sought refuge at her parents’ home on Mother’s Day, only to be confronted by him again and killed.
Shortly after the murder he killed himself, leaving their two children, 8 and 11, 
orphaned.

The nurse’s murder comes after a Nongoma woman, who had been stoned and burnt, allegedly by her boyfriend succumbed to her injuries at the weekend.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nurse Ntombizodwa Charlotte Dlamini, 40, was gunned down by her husband, Sipho Dlamini, at her parents’ Richmond Crest home on Sunday. 

She had gone to her parents’ home after her husband assaulted her on Saturday night. 

Speaking to The Mercury yesterday, her father, Ndoda Ntuli, said the family was 
devastated. 

He said the family had been preparing for a Mother’s Day lunch when Dlamini arrived from Edendale Hospital where she worked as a nurse. 

Dlamini had confided in her mother about being assaulted by her husband and had showed her the injuries on her back. 

“We told her we won’t let her go back after he beat her so badly,” said Ntuli. 

He said Dlamini then went into a bedroom to rest while the family sat in the lounge together. “He (Sipho) called her saying he was at the hospital to fetch her, and was told she was not there. She told him she went to see the doctor because of the beating he gave her.”

Some time after the call, Sipho - a correctional services officer - arrived at the Ntuli home and sat down with the family while Dlamini remained in the bedroom. 

Ntuli said: “I asked him ‘are you the one who assaulted my child?’ He boldly and arrogantly said ‘yes’, at which point I told him the matter was beyond us and his family needed to be here.”

Ntuli said Sipho then became aggressive and accused the family of disrespecting him.

He pulled out a gun and ran down the passage to the bedroom where Ntombizodwa had locked herself in. 

“He kicked in the door and shot her just like that My child died in her nurse’s uniform there in the passage.” 

Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo called the murder “barbaric and cruel”, adding that he could not imagine the pain of the family. 

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said Sipho’s body was later found in Richmond with a gunshot wound to the chin. He is believed to have killed himself.

Meanwhile Nompumelelo Mthembu, 28, who was allegedly attacked by her partner, died at the weekend.

The KZN Department of Social Development said Mthembu had been stoned, doused with petrol and set alight, allegedly by her boyfriend who had been on bail for an earlier assault on her.

Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said they were still searching for Siyabonga Sizwe Buthelezi, 31, who is also the father of Mthembu’s three children. 

The social development department said Mthembu’s children, aged four months to 6 years, had been taken to a place of safety.

The murders come just two weeks after Mangosuthu University of Technology student Zolile Khumalo was shot and killed. The 21-year-old’s ex boyfriend, Thabani Mzolo, has been charged with her murder.

Commenting on the recent attacks on women by their partners, Janine Hicks, a law lecturer at the University of KwaZulu-Natal who specialises in gender equality, said the level of intimate partner violence in South Africa was 
devastating. 

She said studies had shown that at the heart of intimate partner violence was gender inequality due to the power imbalance between men and women. 

Hicks also said there was impunity when it came to gender-based violence, which suggested to perpetrators that they could get away with it over and over again. 

“We live in a violent so-
ciety, violence is normalised in families, in society and by extension in intimate partner 
relationships.”

Sonke Gender Justice’s Andre Lewaks said changing the attitudes of men was key to ending gender-based violence. 

“We need to challenge gender norms and address problematic issues around masculinity. It is a conversation men need to have,” he said. 

Javu Baloyi, spokesperson at the Commission for Gender Equity, said the men who killed these two women were brazen. 

“These men are daring, and our law enforcers are allowing them to be so.”
The Mercury