UKZN students lashed out at the retired and outspoken politician Makhosi Khoza and accused her of being arrogant and a "non-contributor" to solutions for the country's problems. 
They sang pro-Jacob Zuma songs as they staged a walk-out at the UKZN Howard College theatre while Khoza was speaking on the podium on Wednesday evening. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The trigger was when Khoza told the angry students that it was tragic their intellectual abilities were not refined as they could not engage in a debate without insulting a person. 
Before their dramatic walk-out, Khoza addressed the students at the 7th annual Conversation for Change seminar which was centred around the topic of the promises and paradoxes of reconciliation in to commemorate Africa Day that will be celebrated on Friday.

 



They accused Khoza of quoting the African revolutionary anti-colonial leader Amílcar Cabral in her speech to promote her own “liberal ideals”.
Students went on the attack stance and also accused her of being “no better than [Jacob] Zuma” - the man they said she has a personal problem with. 

“You didn’t get a ministerial job so you got angry and you left. Even this job, you will get angry and leave,” one of the students said referring to her new executive directorship of the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (OUTA). 

Khoza shared the podium with Director of the Institute of Afrikology and a well-known motivational speaker Yaa Ashantewaa K. Archer-Ngidi and political analyst Lukhona Mnguni. 

However, the gathering soon turned hostile when in quoting Cabral, students did not take Khoza’s chosen quotes lightly saying she was using the platform and Cabral’s quotes to attack Zuma and the ANC. 

“This is Cabral, not me. Excuse me, this is Cabral and because I am speaking to many students here I am going to say that frankly, I am unapologetic of being a feminist,” she said after quoting Cabral who said there were comrades who made sacrifices but with the idea that tomorrow they would reap the benefits such as service several wives. 

“The ANC made a mistake to send arrogant people to power. She has just showed herself. You must treat people with respect,” one student told Khoza. 

Another student told Khoza she was no better than an uneducated person as she has not contributed to fixing the issues facing the country.

“You just stand there with your PhD and your big words but what have you done?” he asked. 
The Mercury