Durban - Sibonelo Mkhize, the man implicated in the botched hijacking that claimed the life of nine-year-old, Sadia Sukhraj, has claimed that he was assaulted by police. Mkhize was provisionally charged with the Sukhraj's murder and that of his accomplice, who was found dead after a third suspect fled.
He is also charged with the theft of the Hyundai iX35 they allegedly hijacked from Sadia’s father, Pastor Shailendra, as he was dropping off his 7-month-old son with his parents before taking Sadia to school. 

Mkhize limped up the steps from the holding cells into the dock, having to be encouraged by the court orderly.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

His right eye was swollen and there were blood spatters on his bright green pullover. 

Magistrate Mahomed Motala read out the charges, including theft of the SUV and kidnapping. 

As proceedings got under way, Mkhize raised his hand. After consulting with him, his legal aid representative, Anele Mveku, told the court that he claimed to have been assaulted by police. He asked to be remanded at the Westville Correctional Facility rather than returned to the Durban Central police station, where he was held after he was moved from the Chatsworth Magistrate’s Court, for safety concerns. 

State prosecutor Surekha Marimuthu said it would be easier to facilitate confirmation of his address and other matters concerning the investigation if Mkhize was remanded at the police station before his bail application. She also claimed his injuries were sustained at the time of his arrest. 

Mkhize was apprehended by an off-duty police officer. 

Mveku said her client conceded that he was assaulted by the community but said that accounted only for the wounds on his face. 

After consulting with four detectives in court, Marimuthu told the court that Mkhize could at least be taken to the police station overnight, which he vehemently rejected. 

Mveku said the suspect complained of being made to sleep on the cold, concrete floor without a mattress or blanket at the station. The state conceded, and magistrate Motala then ruled that Mkhize was to spend the night at Westville prison, adding that arrangements would be made for the detectives to take him to verify his address before his next appearance on Thursday. 

MEC for Community Safety and Liaison Mxolisi Kaunda met with community leaders at the Chatsworth police station. Also at the meeting was the SAPS acting provincial commissioner, Lieutenant-General Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi, mayor Zandile Gumede and the area’s Community Policing Forum chair, Jakes Singh. 

Kaunda, along with a delegation, later visited the Sukhraj family. He called for harsher sentences as a deterrent for such crimes. “We also engaged with the community members in this area and they raised their concerns about what should have been done,” he said. 

The delegation included cluster commander Mandlenkosi Chirwa, station commander Brigadier Kevin James and other police officials, as well as deputy mayor Fawzia Peer, city manager Sipho Nzuza and chair of eThekwini’s community services committee, Zama Sokhabase. 

Sadia’s father, Pastor Shailendra, said he had confidence in the police. He said his faith was helping him and his family. “Sixteen years ago, I buried my brother (who was) shot dead. Sixteen years later I now bury my daughter (who was) shot dead. What has sustained me is the peace and the love I have in Christ Jesus my Lord there is one thing that I want to say to this nation: put your hope in God, he will see you through,” he said. 
The Mercury