Durban - Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane has defended his department’s administrative and financial health, saying allegations that it is under 
financial pressure and on the verge of collapse are untrue.
Dlungwane found himself having to defend the department following calls by the National Teachers Union (Natu) for the department to be placed under administration.

The recent visit by the Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga, sparked  fears of collapse as it was seen as an intervention. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

However, such reports have been denied by Dlungwane. 

He was speaking to the media outside the construction site of the “new” maths and science centre in La Mercy.
The construction site of the maths and science centre being built in La Mercy. 
Picture: Supplied


The school was proposed a few years ago and was scheduled to open its doors next year. Natu wrote to Motshekga a few weeks ago, asking her to place the department under 
administration.

Among the union’s concerns are the failure to payGrade R teachers on time, the controversial tender for sanitary towels, and the nutrition programme that was challenged in the courts after losing bidders complained of irregularities. 

There are also concerns about pupil transport following revelations that the ­department might be unable to fund it. 

Dlungwane said: “I can 
assure you that the department is fully functional and it does not have financial problems.”

On the issue of school 
nutrition, he said, “The children will continue to receive their food (while the matter is being resolved) and there will be no disruptions. 

“In the past there were complaints that suppliers were not being paid on time. In turn, they would stop feeding the children. We have done away with that by ‘ring fencing’ the money for nutrition,” he said. 

On pupil transport, Dlungwane conceded the 
department faced difficulties.

“At this stage we are transporting around 55 000 children, but we should be transporting more than 300000 children and, we need over R500million each year. This year we will be building hostels in some of the rural schools to cut out transporting pupils. The building of hostels could cost us less than what we will be paying on transport and our children will be safe,” he said. 

DA MPL and spokesperson on Education Dr Rishigen Viranna said Dlungwane was creating a false picture. 

“How can the department be administratively sound when it has not had a CFO for the past two years, or the head of curriculum or the head of legal services?” he said. 

IFP MPL Thembeni KaMadlopha-Mthethwa said: “To us it is clear that the department is collapsing. It is just hard for the MEC as the person in charge to see that.”
The Mercury