The South Gauteng High Court in Pretoria has denied members of the Gupta family leave to appeal against an interim court order compelling them to return a rented luxury jet to its foreign owner.
Judge Fayeeza Kathree-­Setiloane handed an interim order in March that the aircraft, a luxury Bombardier Global 6000 business jet, be returned and held at Lanseria airport. It is understood that the jet is being kept at Lanseria.

The Guptas lodged an 
application on  March 23, challenging the ruling.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Guptas had a lease agreement with Export Development Canada (EDC) and Stoneriver for the aircraft, but are engaged in a legal dispute in UK courts over the agreement.

Judge Kathree-­Setiloane said on Thursday it would not be in the interests of justice to allow an appeal, pending final determination of the case abroad.

“This court granted interim relief pending final determination of the English proceedings The order granted here does not dispose of the relief sought in the English proceedings. It ­merely preserves the safety.”

During the previous court proceedings, Stoneriver stated in the application that, between October and December last year, there had been a number of breaches of the lease agreement, and the company had terminated the agreement with Westdawn on December 13.

Stoneriver then instruc­ted Westdawn, a Gupta-­owned company, to return the aircraft.

Westdawn refused. It challenged the notice to cancel the lease in the UK courts, leading Stoneriver and EDC to approach the South African courts to grant an interim order to have the plane grounded and stored until the matter was finalised in the English courts.

Court papers from March indicate public tracking for the aircraft was turned off on February 4.  

This is said to have “created an extraordinary situation” depriving its owner and financier of information about its whereabouts.

Part of the reasons given by the judge were that the transponder had been turned off, resulting in the owners having no way to determine where the aircraft was. 
African News Agency (ANA)