EDITOR'S VIEW - If there is any doubt about governmental shortcomings, new cabinet ministers are required listening as they take their seats.
With varying degrees of severity, they unpack poor structure, bad practice, inept administration, suspicions of wrongdoing and a variety of other faults in the departments they have inherited.

This is done for two reasons: because it is true, and to shield themselves when their performances are criticised. 
They will then argue the size of the repair they had to manage - 
a practice familiar in the corporate world, too. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Either way, these ministerial woes are evaluations from the inside. They are as uncoated as one will get, given the political penchant to protect comrades and close ranks to outside gaze and assessment. And, though carefully unspoken, they amount to direct indictments of their predecessors.

The Auditor-General’s office is not encumbered by such political sensitivities. It was meant not to be, being a constitutionally created watchdog on government with full access to the workings of our departments. Its report on Wednesday, and a separate one by the Treasury on Monday, confirm that the state of governance in South Africa is deeply troubling.

The audit of local government for 2016/17, involving 257 municipalities in all, lets the financial books and numbers commentate their performances. 

AG Kimi Makwetu’s remarks accompanying it are usually restrained, but could have contained the word “sliding”. As could the Treasury report on the state of local government finances.

The finance department found nearly half of our municipalities were in poor financial health and struggling to deliver services, collect revenue and pay their debts. Eskom, owed billions, has made the latter plain. 

The Treasury also observed how damaging political infighting had been.

It said that in June last year, 104 municipalities had acting municipal managers, and 88 acting chief financial officers. These statistics alone shout instability.

Makwetu highlighted growing non-compliance with legislation. He also cited a 75% increase in irregular expenditure (R16.2billion in the previous year to R28.4bn in 2016/17). The balance of irregular expenditure over the years stands at R65.3bn. 

Unauthorised spending has grown to R43.5bn, and fruitless and wasteful expenditure to R4.3bn. These speak of lack of control, of unaddressed backlogs, of weakness or incompetence that is rising.

The AG’s report emerges every year, a catalogue of governmental failures. It is a detailed, specific guide to government leaders on where to find the faults, exactly what they are, and how to fix them. Yet the state of governance seems to be worsening.

The release of the Treasury report in the same week, however, leaves those entrusted with our government with no excuses.