Durban - The parents of three premature babies, who died shortly after birth, have told of their pain and are planning legal action because they believe their children died after contracting a bacterial infection.
But St Augustine’s Hospital says it is impossible to conclusively determine whether the newborns died of the infection, pseudomonas, or other ailments associated with their prematurity. 

Nomalungelo Nkabinde and her husband, Simphiwe Shangase, lost their son Lusanele on January 2. He was born on Christmas Eve last year weighing 1.24kg. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Although her baby was born at just 28 weeks, Nkabinde said he had given “the most beautiful cry and I was told he was fine, his lungs just needed to develop more”. 

However, some days later she was told he had contracted a bacterial infection, but Nzimande said she was assured he would recover. 

Less than 10 days later, Nkabinde woke up to missed calls from the hospital. “In my heart I knew,” said Nkabinde. 

Lifeless

At the hospital, they were asked if they wanted a moment with their dead child. “I didn’t want to look at him, I didn’t want to have that picture of him lifeless, then I thought I will never again get a chance to say goodbye to my son.”

Shangase said what made matters worse was that no one seemed to come out with a straight answer about why their son had died. 

Fellow parent Nonjabulo Gwala said she still wept as she recalled holding her daughter Simangaliso on January 9, not knowing those were their last moments together. 

She was born on New Year’s Eve at 27 weeks, weighing just 840g. 

“After a few days her stomach started to swell and I was told it was because of a bacterial infection which was common for premature babies because they are underdeveloped.” But, nine days later, Gwala was called to the hospital. 

“No one told me what happened but for the first time I was allowed to hold my baby. She was hooked up to machines and they took her off when they gave her to me. 

“I held her for about an hour but I was not prepared to say goodbye because I was given reassurances that she would get well.”

Sandile Simelani said he had pulled his wife Mbali Mathenjwa’s hands away when she tried to pick up their son, Zwakele. 

“I didn’t understand why, at a time when he was the most at risk, she was told she could pick him up, when he needed to be kept away in a sterile environment,” he said. 

Zwakele was born on November 29 at 26 weeks, weighing 1.2kg. 

Their fears of the dangers of a premature birth were allayed by assurances that this was not out of the ordinary. 

“I had no concerns, he was small but he was very active, looking around and kicking his little legs. It was just a matter of time before he could come home,” said Mathenjwa. 

However, the child contracted pseudomonas. “No one tells us what this infection is or how serious it is. It’s just treated very matter-of-factly,” said Simelani. 

He died on December 21. 

Professor Olga Perovic, principal pathologist at the National Institute for Communicable Diseases said pseudomonas was a bacteria that not only caused disease in plants and animals, but also in humans, particularly causing serious infections in immuno-compromised patients or those who had been exposed to hospital environments. 

Infection reservoirs included respiratory equipment, cleaning solutions, disinfectants, sinks, mops, vegetables, fruits, flowers, endoscopes, and physiotherapy pools. She said it had high rates of morbidity and mortality in infected patients with underlying clinical conditions, and neonates. 

There were 2238 cases of pseudomonas in the country last year. 
The Mercury