South African scientists have returned to Cape Town from Marion Island with scientific data that will continue to place the country at the forefront of understanding the oceans.
This is according to deputy director-general: Oceans and Coats, Judy Beaumont, who spoke at a welcoming cere­mony at the V&A Waterfont, in Cape Town, yesterday. 

The 74-strong expedition team, including a host of researchers and scientists from the Department of Environmental Affairs and tertiary institutions, left our shores for Marion Island last April.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We have no doubt that the data collected will continue to place South Africa at the forefront of a global arena of giants working tirelessly to bring about a thorough understanding of the vast and ­grossly unknown oceans, which we all depend on for ­resources,” said Beaumont.

This was the team’s eighth Marion Island exploration venture, via the SA Agulhas II, to collect diet and blood samples from mammals and birds, as well as soil and plant samples throughout the different seasons of the year, and to complete a census of birds.

“The passion, dedication and devotion of the team to their research and work was beyond reproach. 

“South Africa is very proud of your contribution to the scientific work conducted at Marion Island, extending beyond 50 years and increasing our scientific capacity.

“I am extremely grateful to your families, who last April joined us in bidding farewell to you, and I hope they are here in our midst to welcome you today.”

The team had the support of personnel such as a medics, diesel mechanic, electrician and communications engineers, who ensured the well-­being of the team.

Beaumont said that the studies on the island had produced numerous national and international research publications in areas such as ornithology, geology, zoology, botany, meteorology and space weather that had inspired the rest of the world.

She said the University of Pretoria’s 34th year of the Marion Island Marine Mammal Programme of uninterrupted research had, with 25 years of work with the ­Department of Environmental Affairs and Coastal Research, enabled them to determine the areas of the southern ocean where the mammals and birds they researched were feeding.

“Without this knowledge, we are unable to determine the balance in the marine ecosystem that we depend on for food security, climate impacts and economic fisheries,” Beaumont said. 

She said that the highlights of some of the shore-based research included the deployment of tracking devices on predators, the distribution of wind assessment hardware, and the deployment of space measurement antennas.
The Mercury