Durban - King Goodwill Zwelithini has warned South Africans that investors will not want to plough money into a country in flames.
Referring to civil unrest and the storming of construction sites by those demanding a stake for black companies, the king cautioned that the “outside world is watching”.

“Let’s not do things that will make an investor who is showing interest in our country run away. There is nobody that will bring money into a country that is in flames,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The King was speaking at the opening of the Lakehaven Child and Youth Care Centre which was rebuilt, thanks to a donation by the Sibaya Community Trust. 

Referring to the work stoppage at Sibaya trustee Vivian Reddy’s R4.2billion Oceans Umhlanga project by the Delangokubona business forum last month, the king said while he understood the cause, the destructive methods used were problematic. 

“I know there are a lot of things that we can complain about but we need to not expose ourselves as people who don’t plan things properly,” he said. 

Premier Willies Mchunu apologised to Reddy for being one of the business people who were “invaded and allegedly extorted by some unscrupulous people who want to go into business through being a gang”.

He said through Economic Development MEC Sihle Zikalala the provincial government had intervened to start engagements, and were questioning police about why people were being allowed to run amok and wreak havoc in the province. 

“We are soon going to also have a bigger meeting which will involve business groupings and individuals where we will engage on the phenomenon,” said Mchunu. 

He praised the Imbumba Business Group for rather taking the path of negotiation. 

“In the process, they have exposed themselves to learning what it is to be a capable business person. We applaud you (Reddy) that there is good and strong co-operation between you and those who are approaching this matter responsibly. 

“I want to reiterate, nothing should be done outside the law.”
The Mercury