Durban - There is a very
expensive welcome for the owners of five cars parked at the King Shaka International Airport, with one owing almost R200 000.
At a rate of R275 for the first five days and R55 per day thereafter, one driver who left his car, a Kia Caren, at the airport’s shaded parking lot seven years ago will have to cough up R186 000 and counting, if they ever come back to claim the car. 

“In most cases, the vehicles are abandoned intentionally by the owner, and they then leave the country, so tracking them is fruitless and the vehicle remains until the sheriff or bank claims it,” said King Shaka spokesperson Colin Naidoo.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

They have not been successful in trying to trace the owner of this vehicle, but last year he confirmed to another publication that they had tried to contact the Johannesburg businessman in whose name the vehicle was registered, to no avail. 

The newspaper reported that even his family had not had contact with him, even to tell him his father died two years earlier. 

Naidoo said while there was no set time limit, people generally leave their cars at the airport parking for between five days and three months. 

After six months, they start the process of checking for 
the owner’s details with the police. Currently, they are trying to track the owners of a VW Golf and a Ford Fiesta in long-stay, a Toyota Yaris in shaded, and a Toyota Etios in multi-storey parking lots. 

“We have had these vehicles parked now for about six months and we are working with SAPS to establish who the owners are. 

“Once we have established the owners, SAPS will make contact with them or their family to retrieve their cars and they will make arrangements to make payments for parking,” said Naidoo. 

Long-term parking is not a problem until the airport discovers a car is genuinely abandoned. But this is difficult to ascertain as drivers keep the tickets and the airport can’t be sure the person will not return. 

“The proper removal of the vehicle and the space it occupies, that becomes a challenge for the airport. Usually it is the sheriff of the court that will remove the vehicle or the bank that the car was purchased through - as in most cases, payments are not made.,” Naidoo said.

“When the car is taken by the bank, they make arrangements to pay for the parking balance.”

There have also been instances where families have come to claim cars parked by owners who have died while away on a trip. 
The Mercury