Durban - The arrest of corrupt politicians will curb political killings in KwaZulu-Natal, the DA said in response to revelations that the Hawks were investigating eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede for allegedly instructing that city tenders to be awarded to her cronies as a reward for supporting her bid for the powerful position. 
However, Gumede has denied any wrongdoing.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

A Sunday newspaper reported that the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation was investigating Gumede following findings of the Integrity Forensic Solution report.

Read: Mayor mum on Hawks investigation

The findings stated that Gumede had summoned a senior city official to instruct him to give certain companies a R25 million tender to hire and distribute chemical toilets to poor communities. The report alleged that the companies belonged to people who had supported her when she was campaigning for the mayoral position.

DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango said he had appealed to the Hawks “to follow the money in order to clear out corruption”.

“The arrest of corrupt politicians will minimise political killings in the province as most killings are related to tender conflicts,” said Mncwango.

Mncwango said he had on March 19 handed a dossier detailing alleged instances of cor- ruption in the city to provincial Hawks head General Jabulani Zikhali.

“Today the DA is not only relieved by the fact that an investigation is under way, but that the integrity of state institutions like the Hawks is being reinstated,” he said.

ANC caucus leader in eThekwini municipality Nelly Nyamisa said she had not been aware of the report and Hawks investigation before she read the newspaper on Sunday.

Nyamisa said that if there was a need to discuss the matter, they would discuss it today.

Gumede, who also said she had not seen the report or news of the Hawks probe, told The Mercury that she would not resign as mayor, and would carry on with her fight against corruption.

“All I can say is that I am as free as a dove to continue doing my job.

“I hear that people who have been committing corruption are concerned about my fight against corruption. I will continue fighting corruption,” said Gumede.

IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi called on city manager Sipho Nzuza to brief the executive committee so that councillors could interrogate the report. “The Cogta MEC should not ignore this report because, if nothing is done, eThekwini, which is one of the biggest municipalities, would end up under administration,” said Nkosi.

The Mercury