Durban - If you fail to pay submit your tax returns on time, you will be left with a criminal record. This is according to the South African Revenue Service (SARS), who along with the National Prosecuting Authority, have stated that non-compliant taxpayers, including prominent South Africans, who fail to submit returns and are found guilty, will end up with a criminal record.

The operation has already seen its first victim, a KwaZulu-Natal businessman who had to pay an admission of guilt fine of R5 600 for non-submission of more than 50 outstanding Value-Added Tax (VAT), Pay-As-You-Earn, (PAYE) and Corporate Income Tax (CIT) returns. He was ordered to and has submitted all the outstanding returns. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Failure to submit a tax or VAT return is a criminal offence in terms of the Tax Administration Act and Value-Added Tax legislation.

During the week of 16 to 20 April, eight outstanding return cases involving hundreds of outstanding returns will appear on court rolls in different parts of the country, including KZN, Gauteng and the Free State. The campaign marks an intensification of SARS’s Outstanding Returns Project that was launched towards the end of last year when SARS aimed to raise awareness amongst taxpayers about outstanding tax returns.

SARS has over the past few years experienced an unacceptable increase in the non-submission of returns across all tax types, including PAYE, VAT, corporate income and personal income tax.

At the end of March 2018, SARS’s Outstanding Returns Book showed that active taxpayers owed SARS approximately 30 million returns, in many cases showing that multiple outstanding returns were due by a single taxpayer. 

The decision to resort to enforcement of compliance through criminal prosecution is a last resort. All the taxpayers that will appear in court were engaged beforehand and final demands were issued them before the criminal cases commenced. At this stage 36 dockets have been handed over to the NPA.

The significant drop in the submission of returns was one of the key indicators pointing to decreased compliance and was highlighted by Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene during the announcement of the tax revenue collection figures for the 2017/2018 financial year.

The Mercury