Durban - Sausages, ribs, pork burgers and chicken fillets are just some of the items stolen from a ­Famous Foods truck that was one of the 35 vehicles damaged or burnt on the N3 near the Mooi River toll plaza on Sunday.
Although 56 people were arrested following the chaos, only six appeared in the Mooi River Magistrate’s Court yesterday - Wiseman Mthalane, Simphiwe Sithole, Welcome Sikhosana, Christopher ­Khwela, Mzwakhe Khumalo and Xolani Lamula. 

Two minors who had also been arrested were released into the care of their parents Wednesday. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said the other 48 were released due to there being insufficient ­evidence against them. 

The six are charged with the theft of some of the 12 food items listed on the charge sheet. 

After they asked to be represented by Legal Aid, lawyer Vishal Sahibdeen told the court that none of the accused had ever been convicted of a crime or had cases pending against them.  

State prosecutor Ryan Poe said the State intended opposing bail, but asked that the ­application be postponed so that the police could verify the addresses of the accused. 

There was a collective sigh from the public gallery, which was packed with the families and friends of the accused, when they were told that they would remain in custody.

One woman rushed out of court in tears. She is reportedly the wife of one of the ­accused. 

Another woman, who spoke to The Mercury before court, said her husband had left their home in the Town View section of Bruntville, which neighbours the N3, when they noticed the flames. 

“A lot of people went to see what was happening. But when he didn’t come home I got worried. He only phoned in the morning to say he had been arrested.” She and others spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. 

The mother of another accused questioned why community members had been arrested for “taking” items that would have otherwise burnt in the trucks. 

“I don’t think the police are being fair, the people they ­arrested are not the ones who set those trucks on fire,” she said. 

It is believed that the violent protests were due to the hiring of foreigners as truck drivers. This was the second such incident, as trucks were also torched during the Easter weekend. 

A truck driver who was in court to check on a friend and colleague who had been ­arrested, believes it is truck owners who had caused the tensions. 

“They hire foreigners and take advantage of their desperation. These guys work for half of what we earn, sometimes less. They don’t take leave or go home,” he said. 

“Some of them don’t have papers so they can’t even complain when things get too bad, they just work.”  

He said that some truck owners only hired foreigners. 

His colleague, who was one of the 48 people released, said he had unwittingly given a lift to a “looter” and was arrested with his nephew when the items were found in his car. 

The six  are expected back in court on Monday to apply for bail. 
The Mercury