Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Task Team has arrested three men who were wanted for public violence which occurred at Moses Mabhida Stadium on April 21.
Earlier, Phelelani Jojisa, 32, was arrested and appeared in court for the riots at Moses Mabhida Stadium.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Jojisa is accused of being part of the violence that erupted at the stadium after Kaizer Chiefs lost 2-0 to Free State Stars during the Nedbank Cup semi-final match.
Major General Bheki Langa, KwaZulu-Natal Acting Provincial Commissioner commended the Task team for the arrests.
“We know how much of work has been put in by these dedicated detectives to bring us to where we are now in terms of the investigation. It is only a matter of time before others are arrested. I would advise those who were part of the mob that went on a rampage on that unfortunate day to hand themselves over to police as one of these three who were arrested did. If not you will have to be continuously looking over your shoulders. We will not tolerate such hooliganism in this province,” Langa said.
Brigadier Jay Naicker, KwaZulu Natal police spokesperson, said the three arrested include a truck driver, 35, a taxi rank manager, 29, and a taxi owner, 35.
Naicker said they are set to appear at the Durban Magistrate's Court on Wednesday on charges of public violence.
He said detectives are still appealing to those who were injured in the violence that unfolded to come forward and provide investigators with a statement. Many of those that were injured left after receiving medical attention and did not leave their contact details behind with police.
“Detectives are also appealing to witnesses to please come forward and provide police with information with regards to the perpetrators of the violence and destruction of property that was witnessed on that day. An appeal is made to all members of the public who can assist the police in their investigations to urgently contact Captain Reddy 082 458 5630 or Detective Warrant Officer Mlungwana 082 662 7764. All information will be treated with the strictest confidence,” he said.
Daily News