After three years of dragging its feet, the eThekwini municipality says it is now ready to adopt and implement the Air Quality Management Plan.
The municipality announced last week that its community services committee had adopted the plan - which has been sitting idle since 2015 - and had set aside R3.5million for the implementation of the plan in the next financial year.

“The interventions (stipulated in the plan) include the refurbishment and replacement of ageing air quality monitors. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“This will greatly contribute to the improvement of the quality of life for the people of eThekwini,” the City said.

However, environmental activists who have been monitoring air pollution in the city believe there is little to celebrate. They argue that over the years the City has not done enough to ensure that there is credible air quality data available, to allow for the proper enforcement of air quality standards.

Responding to questions from The Mercury, City spokesperson Mandla Nsele said the plan now awaited council adoption, but a number of projects contained in the plan were already under 
way.

Nsele said the city’s enforcement efforts were bearing fruit, with fines amounting to R1.4m having been issued to seven industries since 2016.

Desmond D’Sa, the co-ordinator of the South Durban Community Environmental Alliance was, however, not convinced, saying these figures were a thumb-suck.

“Clearly there is a lack of honesty. Most of these companies get away with murder because there is no credible data to hold them accountable. Big industries are also getting away with very little fines ­because there is a lack of political will and an element of corporate capture,” he said.

D’Sa said the lack of credible data was mainly due to many monitoring stations being broken, while there was also a shortage of well-trained air quality officers who could interpret the data collected at the stations.

Nsele, however, told The Mercury that the 10 non-continuous and six dust fallout monitors were working optimally, and the problem was with the 14 continuous stations, which he said were ­ageing .

“Additional capital funding has been made available in the 2018/19 financial year to commence the replacement process. The plan contains a ­five-year capital recommendation to refurbish the entire network over time,” Nsele said. 

This, too, was disputed by D’Sa, who said it was not because the infrastructure was  ageing that it had become dysfunctional, but rather because of a lack of proper maintenance. 

Rico Euripidou, an environmental health campaigner at groundWork, said compared with the rest of the world, South Africa had very relaxed standards on air quality.

“The World Health Organisation standards in general are twice as stringent as ours. We are barely compliant even then,” he said.

He added that it was concerning that the government was forging ahead with plans to create a logistics park in Clairwood, which was already considered a hotspot. 

This park, he said, would increase traffic volumes in the area, leading to more ­emissions.