Durban - The man accused of killing university student Zolile Khumalo smiled for the media cameras as he entered the Durban Magistrate’s Court on Thursday.
Thabani Mzolo, 23, is accused of shooting Khumalo at a Mangosuthu University of Technology (MUT) residence in Durban’s CBD on Tuesday. 

He is a former student, while Khumalo was in her first year studying quantity surveying.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The murder made headlines after Mzolo allegedly posted on Facebook after the murder.

On a Facebook profile believed to be Mzolo’s, which has his photo, but a different name and surname, a post is made about “Zozo” who is gone.

Also on the profile is a photo of him and Khumalo holding firearms. He brandishes a rifle while she holds a pistol. 

Thursday Khumalo’s sister, Sane Khumalo, said the family was still too shocked and distraught to speak. 

She said they were concentrating on planning 21-year-old Zolile’s funeral, and had since gone back home to Eshowe after rushing to Durban upon hearing the news. 

In court, Mzolo smiled again - this time at the public gallery, which was filled ­mostly with MUT students. 

As he looked back at the students, some of them flashed threatening signs at him.

In response, Mzolo made signs of his own, indicating pulling a trigger. He continued this motion as he went down the stairs into the holding cells.  

“Look at this thing, he doesn’t care,” said someone in the gallery. 

During his brief appearance before magistrate Mohamed Motala, Mzolo was told that he was charged with murder and the possession of prohibited firearms and ammunition. 

He applied to be represented by Legal Aid, and after a brief consultation with his lawyer, the court heard that he had finished his studies at MUT last year. 

The case was postponed for further investigation. 

Outside court, hundreds of MUT students picketed, having marched from Khumalo’s student residence in the CBD. 

Among the students were her friends. Some were in tears and were so overwhelmed they had to be held, or sat down. 

Through her tears, one said; “I prayed to God to give me the strength, but its not working,” she said about facing the 
man accused of killing her friend. 

MUT SRC president Sandile Dlamini reported back to the students on what had happened in court. 

“He did not show remorse for what he did to Zoe. 

“It was just a happy time for him in court,” he said.

He added that Mzolo did not deserve to live among humans for what he had done. He said Khumalo had done nothing wrong and should not have died for breaking up with him. 

A WhatsApp chat, which is believed to be between Khumalo and a person she calls her sister, has been circulating on social media.

While the authenticity of the messages could not be confirmed yesterday, in it, ­Khumalo wrote that she was happy as she had broken up with “Thaban”. The other person then cautions her that something might happen, to which Khumalo ­responds that after breaking up with him she had phoned his parents to tell them that if anything happened to her, they should speak to Mzolo. 

Mzolo is due back in court to apply for bail on Monday. 

MUT spokesperson Mbali Mkhize said a crisis communication team had been organised to probe the contract between the university and the company that owns and runs the Lonsdale Residence. 

She said part of the probe would be to check how and why Mzolo gained access to the residence.

The contract between the company and university states that there should be no visitors after 6pm, but records show that he entered the residence after 9.20pm.
The Mercury