The textile industry in South Africa has seen enormous turmoil over the past few decades, with cheap imported fabrics and clothing and ready-made fashion knock-offs and haberdashery flooding our stores, and even the drop of the subject, home economics, from school syllabuses, contributing to the upheaval.
And yet a Pietermaritzburg stalwart, Ragland, has not only survived, but flourished, staying defiantly afloat through the worst times, and emerging victorious at the other end.

Ragland, specialising in textiles, haberdashery, home décor and custom curtain installations, is a family owned and run business which has stuck firmly to its principles of quality products and first-class service, and if diversification was necessary to help keep Ragland abreast of the tough economic times, it has only increased customer appeal.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Our biggest asset has always been my father, Peter, who started selling off-cut fabrics by mail order in 1973,” said director Jordan Soar. 

In those days, fabrics were so cheap, textile factories would burn their offcuts. Soar would buy these and resell them - the demand was huge, and there was no problem finding customers.

During all of this, Durban-based Soar Snr and his wife, Dot, noticed that many of their orders originated from Pietermaritzburg. 

So they took a leap of faith and opened a small store in Church Street, selling offcuts but also fabrics "off the roll".

A second shop was opened at the other end of town. 

Another move followed several years later, until finally, they bought their existing property in Peter Kerchhoff Street where they built their large double-storey store.

Ragland has come a long way from the one assistant and tiny Church Street shop. Today there are two-dozen staff, including Jordan, his mother and his father, who is still very hands-on and works every day.

“When you’re young, you want to do everything your way, but as you get older, you realise there is no point in reinventing the wheel,” said Jordan. 

“My father has shown endless patience with me, and what he teaches me on a daily basis, I would never have learned at university.”

As a baby, he would sleep in a basket in the shop while his parents served customers. 

As a schoolboy, his father started him off on the floor serving customers. 

“The only way to learn was to follow the staff around, find out what and where the dress fabric was, for instance, so I could measure and cut for customers," said Jordan.

The industry had changed dramatically since then, he recalled.

“We used to sell a lot of dress patterns, for instance. My girlfriends and their friends used to sew their own clothes, and home economics and sewing lessons at schools were big. Ladies would come in and I’d help them look for the perfect fabric, and matching cotton and buttons. Nowadays, they go to chain stores and buy a cheap knock-off.”

He and his father would travel to the many local mills through the province, meeting suppliers. 

“I learned how to trade, how to buy for R1, sell for R1.50. Our customers could make up a dress for far less than it cost to buy one, and the range of fabrics was astounding.”

Ragland still sells offcuts and off the roll fabrics, but the range of offerings has quadrupled and includes dress, upholstery and curtain fabric to buttons, laces and zips, to blinds, cushions, curtain rails and all manner of haberdashery, to linens, linings and more. 

Very little fabric these days is manufactured locally. Much of it comes from China, Turkey and
Indonesia.

“Sitting with a rep looking at samples is not half as much fun as travelling to the mills in the old days and haggling with suppliers,” said Soar Snr. But conversely, the scope of business offered by Ragland is also twice as diverse as it was.

“We have a team of upholsterers, curtain makers and installers on site, and offer a holistic service to customers,” said Jordan. 

“We meet customers at their homes, advise on rails, curtains and blinds, for instance, help them choose fabric, make up the drapes, upholster their sofas for instance, or sew their duvet covers and scatter cushions, and deliver it all. 

"We don’t just sell a piece of fabric - we try as hard as we can to help customers get exactly what they want, even if it’s replicating something they’ve seen on the internet, on Pinterest!”
The Mercury