Durban - More than 200 councillors across KwaZulu-Natal municipalities do not have matric, Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube revealed on Thursday.
Dube-Ncube said there was an urgent need to build capacity at local government level.

Delivering her department’s R1.6billion budget for  2018/2019, Dube-Ncube said her department was embarking on a back-to-
basics programme as it seeks to stabilise and make municipalities more resilient.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Part of the programme will focus on capacity building at municipalities, where, out of the 1846 councillors, 234 have some schooling but no matric, four do not have any schooling while 322 only have matric.

Dube-Ncube said her department also had to grapple with the issue of unqualified senior managers.

She said the department had to nullify applications for municipal managers and senior managers who were not qualified for those positions. 

“We have, to date, made decisions nullifying seven full-time applications and 33 acting applications for the appointments of municipal managers or senior managers not qualifying in municipalities,” she told the provincial legislature.

Independent analyst Bukani Mngoma said the issue of councillors lacking basic education compromised the functioning of municipal councils to a certain degree. 

“Remember that they have to read reports and financial statements, so without any form of training it becomes difficult for them to play their oversight role (effectively). That is why sometimes you have officials running roughshod over them by using big language. Also our legislation is available in English and it makes it difficult for some to comprehend it,” he said.

However, Mngoma said it would be undesirable to start using education as a criterion for one to be elected a councillor and suggested that a long-term solution has to be sought.

“One of the things Cogta might have to do is to work with universities to ensure that there is some sort of qualification for people who want to be councillors, but that is something that can only be implemented, say, in the next 10 years.”

In her speech Dube-Ncube announced an arsenal of other measures aimed at bolstering the functioning of KZN municipalities. These included cutting down on money spent on consultants and cars for office-bearers, and aggressively going after debtors who owed billions to municipalities. 

Cutting costs

She said while the government had frequently requested municipalities to curtail expenditure on non-essential items and prioritise service delivery, some had not heeded the call.

Dube-Ncube said a circular stipulating new cost-cutting regulations has been sent to municipalities, and all municipalities were expected to abide by these or risk facing financial-misconduct proceedings. 

Among others, these regulations limit the cost of official vehicles for office-bearers to R700000 or 70% of the office-bearer’s annual package and also limit the number of delegations to international meetings.

“Flight tickets will be limited to economy class travel, and subsistence will be limited to reasonable amounts. There will be a total ban on the use of municipal credit cards as well as restrictions on catering, entertainment and advertising, and the cost of security for office-bearers will be curtailed.” 

Dube-Ncube also announced an aggressive revenue collection campaign, saying municipalities were owed more than R16.4billion by debtors, including provincial departments, businesses and households.

“This debt comprised R512m by national and provincial departments, R1.1bn by businesses and R5.1bn by households,” said Dube-Ncube.

“We have information on who owes and we will go for them.”

Dube-Ncube said she had written to various MECs requesting payments.

“I was excited that some of the MECs started to pay, and brought me evidence that they had paid.”

Responding to the budget, DA MPL Hlanganani Gumbi painted a bleak picture of KZN municipalities, saying two of the province’s biggest municipalities, Msunduzi and eThekwini, were on the brink of collapse.

“In Msunduzi, the MEC has been part of the problem rather than the solution after she supported the appointment of the municipal manager despite initially advising against it. In eThekwini the ANC mayor has purged senior managers, collapsed the housing department and made corruption the order of the day,” he said.

IFP MPL Blessed Gwala also said most of South Africa’s muni-
cipalities were in shambles, with as many as 93% facing cash-flow problems. He said many of the problems facing municipalities had political roots and accused Dube-Ncube of only intervening in municipalities based on who runs them.
The Mercury