Durban - Police have been hailed after a multidisciplinary operation led to the arrest of a man wanted in connection with a spate of murders and attempted murder cases at the Glebelands Hostel. 

On Monday, police pounced on the 32-year-old man, who had been in hiding in the Harding area. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Police spokesperson, Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane, said the arrest comes after an intensive investigation was launched by the various police units. 

“Police traced the man, who remained very elusive, to the Harding area where he was arrested. He has been charged with an attempted murder case where Fezeka Njiyelo, 29, was shot and wounded in 2016 at the Glebelands Hostel. The suspect will also be charged with two counts of murder where two Glebelands Hostel residents were killed at Montclair in 2015. He will appear at the Umlazi Magistrates Court tomorrow and is expected to join the seven other suspects whose bail was successfully opposed,” Zwane said. 

He said on September 12, William Mthembu and Thokozani Machi were exiting a supermarket in Montclair when they were attacked. It is alleged that the suspects shot and killed them before fleeing in their getaway vehicle. A murder docket was opened at the Montclair police station. 

“It was immediately established that the victims were from the Glebelands Hostel and that their murder was linked to the tensions in the hostel at that time and the Detective Task Team immediately took over the investigation,” Zwane said. 

Commenting on the matter, KwaZulu-Natal Acting Provincial Commissioner, Major General Bheki Langa, welcomed the arrest of the suspect.

“This arrest once again demonstrates that our police officers are still committed to bringing those responsible for criminality at Glebelands hostel to book. We are aware of the great lengths that our police officers go through in tracing those who were allegedly involved in these killings at Glebelands Hostel and we commend them for their persistence,” he said.

The Mercury