Durban - Teacher unions grabbed the opportunity to voice their grievances with the Department of Education on Thursday by protesting outside the KwaZulu-Natal legislature while MEC of Education Mthandeni Dlungwane delivered this year’s budget.
The SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) and National Teachers Union (Natu) rallied their members to protest about issues including the salaries of Grade R teachers, repairs to storm-damaged schools in the province and the reallocation of R109million which had previously been set aside for a sanitary towels programme in schools. 

The department has been in the limelight recently with four major tenders under investigation - namely the National Schools Nutrition Programme, the new pupil transport tender, the sanitary towel tender and the Learning and Teaching Support ­Material (LTSM) tender.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In delivering the budget yesterday, Dlungwane began by addressing the recent issue of Grade R teachers’ salaries, saying the department planned to increase their stipends by R750, with an increase of R1250 for fully qualified teachers. 

“Those people outside must rest assured that we are working on this. This is a matter that is very close to my heart because teachers are important, and they must know how important they are when they are in the classrooms,” he said. 

The bulk of the department’s R50.9billion budget was allocated to ordinary public schools - which received R42.6bn - with the focus on poorer schools in the province. 

Included in the budget is the provision of R3.5bn for conditional grants.

Just over R2bn was allocated to infrastructure development. 

Dlungwane said the educational conditional grant was the main source of funding for infrastructure development, “which is not an ideal situation” as the infrastructure allocation continued to decline. 

Dlungwane said the National School Nutrition Programme would provide nutritious meals to the value of R1.5bn to about 2.3million pupils from more than 5200 schools. The tender for the programme came under fire last year with a tribunal recommending the procurement processes be started afresh. 

Dlungwane said the department had complied with the recommendation and had since completed the first step of starting the process by cancelling the bid. 

Another initiative by the department that has since been exposed as riddled with corruption is the provision of sanitary towels. Addressing this programme, Dlungwane said all concerns were being attended to. 

“We undertake to ensure that the report of an independent investigation into all concerns that have been raised is made public. 

“Critically, we want those who may have information that points into irregular 
 activities to contact the relevant authorities,” Dlungwane said. 

The DA’s provincial education spokesperson, Rishigen Viranna, called Dlungwane out for his lack of oversight, saying the department was suffering from a severe lack of leadership. Viranna said that according to the national benchmark, KwaZulu-Natal’s poorest schools should receive R1300 per pupil, but only received R955 per pupil.

The IFP’s Thembeni Mthethwa called for the department’s leadership to be held responsible for lack of water and sanitation at schools. 

“Sanitation is not being prioritised by the department as toilets are overflowing and pupils are forced to go home to relieve themselves,” she said. 
The Mercury