Durban - DA leader Mmusi Maimane has gone the extra mile to ­explain to his party’s white supporters that tackling black poverty does not mean taking away their privileges.
Addressing hundreds of his supporters from all races at Kloof High School in Durban at the weekend, Maimane, who vowed to be the next president after next year’s general elections, blamed the ANC for failing to change the status quo.

Maimane said his white wife, Natalie, had better privileges than him because of the unjust apartheid system. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“But I won’t blame her. I won’t say to her, let us get rid of your privileges and benefits. I will simply say to her, in 1994 it was not a war of one race against another, it was all races fighting a system that ­excluded me,” he said.

He called on his white supporters to not dismiss black people’s pain.

“They feel injustice and you have a great role to contribute to solving their pain,” he said.

Maimane had attracted criticism within the party structures after he spoke about white privilege and black poverty. Some senior DA leaders said his statement would alienate white voters ahead of next year’s general elections.

Blaming the ANC, Maimane said through corruption the majority of black people were still living in poverty. 

“You and I, black and white, can work together to address that injustice, and through its vision, the DA is the only party that can achieve this,” he said.  

Maimane slammed racism, saying when he viewed social media he saw racial comments that should not be allowed in South Africa. 

“It feels like all of us are talking past each other, and there are people who see themselves as superior and see ­others as inferior.”

He said black people would never win the war of advancing themselves if they were focused on blaming the past, instead of looking ahead. 

“So let us talk about the ­future,” he said.

He said the DA’s vision was different from that of the ANC and EFF, who were trying to advance black people by suppressing their white counterparts. He said the ANC and EFF were destroying the miracle that had been brought about by former president Nelson Mandela by preaching expropriation of land without compensation. 

He said the DA had, during the drafting of the constitution, pushed for the protection of private property rights “which are today under threat through provocative talk of ­expropriation of land”.

DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango said DA members should fight for the country to be a place where privileges were not reserved for a few on the basis of their race. 

“We have gained political freedom, but nothing much has changed in people’s lives, as inequality still continues as it was during apartheid,” said Mncwango.

He called upon DA members to engage in “difficult and uncomfortable conversations”. 

“Many of our people are still left behind the mainstream economy, and many of them still have no land ownership.”
The Mercury