If you thought controversial prophet Shepherd Bushiri’s followers would turn against him after he handed himself over to the police investigating him for crimen injuria on ­Saturday, you had it all wrong.
From the moment a video of the Pretoria-based Mala­wian, fondly known as Major 1, taken at the Pretoria West police station started making the rounds, his followers have been ready to attack anyone who dared criticise him. 

This was after the leader of Enlightened Christian Gathering (ECG) handed himself to the police to give a statement in connection with the case brought against him by Rustenburg businesswoman, Lebogang Mpane.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The businesswoman pressed criminal charges after he apparently called her a witch live on TV in one of his prophetic sermons, a claim the prophet’s legal representatives denied vehemently.  

The police visited his church last week in an attempt to obtain a statement from him, but pandemonium broke out between them and security guards. 

Some social media users were quick to say they had been vindicated as they claimed he was “a fake prophet”. But his congregants were having none of that, and said “the devil was trying to destroy Major 1”.  

On Facebook, Azania Azania said: “God forbid! If there are hated people, this earth has seen they are prophets. Especially true prophets, Prophet Bushiri, you got my support. May God keep you and bless you and your family.”

Unathi Binase thought she could pull the “I told you so” stunt on Bushiri’s followers. However, Robert Monjedzi ­reminded Binase who the last man standing would be.

“Let them try all they can to stop him, but at the end he will triumph over them. As for him, he must keep on loving them, and his master (Jesus Christ) will keep on fighting for him.”

@ReginaldTlhole1 was another Major 1 fan who encouraged others not to be swayed by all the negativity.   

“No demon, no Satanist, can defeat Major Prophet Shepherd Bushiri and his followers. I love you so much with all my heart. God will always be with you forever.”

The man of the cloth’s legal representative, Terrance Baloyi, confirmed accompanying Bushiri to the police station at around 7pm on Saturday. 

He said they were convinced the constable in charge of the case had a personal vendetta against the prophet. 

In addition, Baloyi said they were also considering ­taking legal action against ­police officers who shot a video of Bushiri and later shared it on social media.  

A police comment on the matter was still pending.
The Mercury