Durban - The National Teachers Union (Natu) believe a “hit” on its deputy president, Allen Thompson, could be linked to the “scandals” the union exposed about the misuse of funds belonging to the Department of Education.
Thompson is recovering in hospital after being shot in the shoulder on Friday while 
driving to Durban.

The police, however, suggested the motive could also have been robbery and urged people not to walk around with large sums of money as Thompson had been at the time.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Natu president Siphosethu Ngcobo said he visited Thompson in hospital and he was healing. 

“What happened to Thompson was a clear hit. We suspect that this could be linked to all the revelations that we have been making concerning the department,” he said.

The union has held media briefings recently detailing allegations of corruption and misuse of department funds.  Ngcobo believed the briefings may have offended people who were looting the department. 

“Some of the things that we have revealed in our press briefings are serious things that could cost people their businesses and careers, and they could lead to more damning revelations of further allegations of corruption,” said Ngcobo.

He said while Thompson had not received a direct threat, the union had received warnings. 

“People have been telling us that while the issues that we have revealed are important, we should be very careful because we are walking on dangerous ground." 

He said the hitmen had first shot Thompson at the Gateway interchange bridge, and they pursued him all the way to hospital.

“From the footage of the hospital that I have seen, a group of about five men had followed him to the hospital, they were heavily armed.

“They ran inside the hospital, that frightened the other people who caused a scene and the five men fled. They went to his car and  took all the other items that were in his car including his two laptops.”

Ngcobo said they were happy Thompson survived.  

“I am not sure how many times they shot at the car, but the one bullet that hit him was aimed at his head. He was fortunate that he saw the gunmen approaching and tried to flee.” 

He said there was nothing sinister about the money Thompson was carrying. “That is to pay service providers who demand to be paid in cash. For instance, we recently had a picket in Pietermaritzburg and the taxis and the buses we used to transport people demanded to be paid in cash.”  

Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said a case of armed robbery was being investigated.
The Mercury