Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba’s wife racked up a travel bill of close to R900000 at taxpayers’ expense, while abroad with her husband in his previous portfolio, it emerged on Thursday.
In a written reply to a question from DA MP David May­nier, the finance ministry said Norma Gigaba accompanied her husband to investor roadshows in New York and several Asian countries. 

Air travel for the trip to  New York between November7 and 11 last year was R122773.The total cost was R873366. Maynier said that although the trip was in line with the Ministerial Handbook, Gigaba should have practised what he preached as Finance Minister at the time.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The former minister of finance, Malusi Gigaba, who was responsible for the implementation of cost containment measures, and who regularly called for greater efficiency in the use of public funds, should have set an example when it came to belt-tightening in South Africa,” said Maynier.

Roadshows

“The fact is Norma Gigaba had no official duties on the investor roadshows, and taxpayers, who have been pushed to the limit by tax increases, should never have had to cough up for what were, in ­reality, a series of intercontinental shopping trips.”

He said even if the expenses were in line with the guidelines set out in the ministerial handbook, it was simply wrong and the minister should do the right thing and “pay back the money” to the National Treasury.

The IFP also weighed in on the issue yesterday, with MP  Mkhuleko Hlengwa saying his party would pursue the matter further at Scopa and Finance Committee meetings.  

He said the IFP wanted the two finance watchdog committees to probe whether there was any justification for Gigaba to be accompanied by his wife on these trips. 

“Even though spousal ­travel is allowed in the ministerial handbook, we think the minister of finance should have known better as he was managing a scant budget,” he said.

Hlengwa added that the presence of the minister’s wife during the roadshows had not added any value to them. 

“You can even tell by her posts on social media that this was a joyride for her, just another way to tick boxes in terms of the holiday destinations she has been to.”

Hlengwa added that a ­review of the ministerial handbook was long overdue, but accused the executive of dilly dallying on the issue ­because “it talks to the review of their own benefits”. 
Mercury ­Reporter and African News Agency (ANA)