Durban - The stage is set for the SAMA24 extravaganza and it will take not one, not two, but three stars to set it alight. Somizi Mhlongo, the much-loved TV and radio personality and host par excellence returns for the record third time as one-third of the hosting team. He will be joined by fellow radio star Dineo Ranaka and comedian Mpho Popps to steer the televised one-night spectacle.

The three prominent showbiz stars will liven things up to make SAMA24 a night to remember. The combination of Somizi who is known to shoot from the hip with his sharp wit and the charismatic Dineo’s appeal plus the comedic timing of Mpho Popps is sure to deliver the perfect backdrop of fun and laughter on local music’s biggest night in the Sun City Superbowl.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Somizi’s talent straddles the worlds of theatre, TV, radio and music. He has become a trusted face and a friend of the SAMA as he goes for the third stab at hosting duties. Dineo is famous for her reality show and the spin off show featuring her family. She’s also a radio jock of many years and a businesswoman. Mpho is one of the new faces of comedy and with every show he continues to earn legions of fans.

RiSA CEO Nhlanhla Sibisi said they are going all out to ensure that SAMA24 is a dazzling experience. 
"As the most credible and premier music awards show in the land, we have to keep up the standards and the hosting team is proof that we have secured only the finest and best our country has to offer. We believe Somizi, Dineo and Mpho will hit all the right notes and leave us entertained.," Sibisi said. 
Spokesperson for the North West Department of Culture, Arts and Traditional Affairs (CATA), Shuping Sebolecwe, said they were pleased that SAMA24 has managed to secure the services of such high-calibre individuals to host such an important event in the calendar of the arts in South Africa.
"We are convinced that these personalities will enhance the entertainment element of the show and make it all the more memorable," Sebolecwe said. 

The main SAMA24 event on 2 June 2018 will be broadcast live on SABC1 at 8pm.