If the attacks on long-distance trucks in Mooi River continue, the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands town risks being rejected by prospective investors and will become a ghost town, Mpofana municipal mayor Xolani Duma said on Wednesday..
Early last month and last Sunday, truck drivers allegedly burnt long-distance trucks near the local N3 toll plaza. 

It is alleged residents looted the trucks, making off with goods worth millions of rand. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

At least 12 trucks were set alight during the first incident, and on Sunday 35 others were burnt or damaged. 

The demonstrations appear to be linked to South African truck drivers who are upset that foreign nationals are being given preference for jobs.

The rural municipality where the attacks have taken place is situated around Mooi River, a town surrounded by vegetable and livestock farms. 

Duma lives in Bruntville, a local township with a high unemployment rate, because it has only one small manufacturing factory.  

Duma said after the first incident, he and Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda interacted with truck drivers suspected of the attacks, and established that their concerns were genuine. 

But he expressed concern that their actions were damaging the reputation of Mooi River, and impacting negatively on the municipality’s economic transformation agenda, which includes mobilising industries to invest locally.

Although some local residents condemned the incident, others described it as an early Christmas as they looted food items in transit. 

“If this thing keeps happening here, this place will become a ghost town as it will be a no-go area for investors,” said Duma.

He said local residents had nothing to do with the burning of trucks, but they did take goods that were in the trucks.

Duma believed that drivers, who he claimed came from across the province, gathered in Mooi River to target trucks.

“I think they come here because our toll plaza is in the middle of the Durban to ­Johannesburg route.

“They use our community members who are unemployed and hungry,” he said.

He said the incidents took place while the municipality was waiting to finalise a local investment deal with a Durban-based toilet paper manufacturing company, which had promised to open a plant and provide employment.

“We are currently preparing to develop an industrial park for this company to move into, but it is unclear if this will go ahead,” he said.

Infrastructure

Duma said the municipality had requested R30 million from the provincial government to provide electricity, water and road infrastructure to the industrial park.

“Toyota wanted to come across, and we had a plan of opening an agri-hub, which would include vegetable processors, feedlots, an abattoir and a market for fresh farm produce,” he said. He said the only factory in the town was Mooi River Tai Yuen Textiles, which had been established with the help of Trade and Investment KZN.    

“After the 1994 elections the only two local factories, one a textile and the other a dairy, relocated to Estcourt, and the area became a ghost town.

“We are trying to revive it by also bringing in the Department of Economic Development’s Operation Vula to help local producers supply their fresh produce to government departments, such as Correctional Services and the Department of Health, but now we are faced with this disaster,” Duma said.

Gavin Kelly, Road Freight Association spokesperson, disputed the allegation that the protests were around the ­hiring of foreign drivers by trucking companies, because he said foreign drivers were mostly used when trucks ­entered countries such as ­Zimbabwe and Zambia.

“Operators will use a Zimbabwean driver for the Zimbabwean leg and a Zambian driver to drive in Zambia, because the drivers speak the language and know the conditions.

“Using foreign drivers in South Africa is not something that’s commonly done because we’ve got enough drivers here,” said Kelly.

He added that all drivers, foreign and local, were paid the same in accordance with the Department of Labour and Bargaining Council regulations, regardless of where the driver came from.  

“If you have a foreign driver working in South Africa you have to have a work permit, and that’s quite a process, so we’re not quite sure what this is really about, because if you look at what’s happening, there’s more criminality than there is a protest,” Kelly said.

Professor Susan Booysen, a political analyst, said the sentiment of xenophobia was widespread in South African communities where foreign nationals were convenient scapegoats.

Department of Transport spokesperson Ishmael Mnisi said the protests were a security and lawlessness issue to be dealt with by the police and other law enforcement agencies, and that the department only regulated the road networks and transport.

“Where there are signs of lawlessness as we have seen taking place in Mooi River, it’s the mandate of the police to deal with such. When we look at the alleged reasons for the protests, it seems to be a labour-related issue around the alleged employment of foreign nationals,” Mnisi said.

He added that this issue would be best handled by the Department of Labour, so that inspectors could investigate the concerns of truck drivers.

“During the Easter protests we advised that labour-related matters should be taken to the Department of Labour, so that it can be resolved there. From our side, we do have traffic law enforcement officers who are manning our roads.”

Mnisi said the department would engage with the freight industry on the issues in the industry and the consequences that they have on the country’s economy and employees.
The Mercury