EDITOR'S VIEW - Romance and pageantry enchanted millions worldwide as a prince married his love on a perfect, sunny day in Windsor.
It captivated many in Durban, too - even bosses at Kings Park, readying for Saturday’s match against the Chiefs, sensed the appeal and advertised that it would be broadcast on big screens.

The global audience was not disappointed. The ceremony confirmed what British royal wedding watchers already know: great planning and precision go into these events. One could virtually set one’s clock by their schedules; the slick competence that shines through is impressive. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Superb television coverage of the vows, the pomp and finery - it was a milliner’s paradise - enhanced the lustre.
But we are a republic almost 10000km away - and there are many republicans in Britain - so why was the marriage of Prince Harry to Hollywood actress Meghan Markle so popular?
Also read: Prince Harry, Duchess Meghan ask for charity donations as wedding gifts

Apart from the sheer attraction of a happy, glamorous wedding, and apart from the fact that it involved the grandson of the Queen of England and head of the Commonwealth, what was in it for viewers afar, like us? Why should we care?

Change: the union of the couple, to become the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, illustrated in a matter of colourful hours the fundamental change that is sweeping the world. It is happening to us, it is happening everywhere.

This spectacular event told viewers that even a royal house steeped in history and the strictest protocols - and sometimes burdened by them - is changing. 

Tradition simply adjusted as the day unfolded.

Here was the sixth in line to the throne marrying an American actress, and a women of colour. 

There was Michael Curry, the presiding bishop of the American Episcopal Church, injecting a very un-British note into proceedings with a lively, passionate sermon to the couple and congregation. He quoted Martin Luther King, touched on slavery.
Also read: Prince Harry, Duchess Meghan to attend first event as a married couple next week

It was remarkable. This, and a choir singing a superb version of Ben E King’s Stand by Me, would have made the bride feel a little more at home in the epicentre of foreign ritual. 

These were probably her touches, epitomising unity across the Atlantic, a mix of cultures, and her equal shareholding in their union. The staid members of the British aristocracy might have viewed these as intrusions. But it really did not matter what these sniffier ones might have felt. Their sentiments were being brushed aside, as Her Majesty watched.

Wedding commentators also noted the nose stud worn by Markle’s mother, Doria Ragland. But this striking clash of royal tradition and other, modern ways, was touchingly trumped by Prince Charles offering her his hand as she left her St George’s Chapel seat to accompany him to the adjoining registry office. It was a warm, reflexive gesture, one of acceptance of his son’s choice.

This was a grand affair, a festival of ceremony and celebration. It was a day of fundamental progress, too, for a royal house that has become a symbol of tradition and ways established over centuries.
The Mercury