Durban - The Department of Education has launched an investigation into George Campbell Technical School following allegations of corruption.
It said the investigation was expected to be completed within 10 working days.

The move against the Durban central school comes just a week after the department announced that it was investigating allegations at Grosvenor Girls school.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Bluff school faces a number of allegations, including racism, unfair treatment of pupils and a high increase in school fees.

“In an ongoing effort to fight fraud and corruption, and to restore order, the ­Department of Education in KwaZulu-Natal will undertake an investigation into the alleged maladministration of affairs at George Campbell Technical High School,” said department spokesperson Kwazi Mthe­thwa.

Mthethwa said they had ­received damning information, citing governance and management issues.

He said the probe would look at fraud and corruption allegations, irregularities with regard to school governing body (SGB) elections, the unauthorised payment of incentives to teachers, and theft.

“Information coming from any member of the public cannot be neglected, especially if it points to issues of financial mismanagement.

“Due to this, the head of department, Dr Enock Nzama, has appointed a team from head office to conduct a preliminary investigation at the school and provide a report with recommendations,” he said. 

He said the department would take stern action against those responsible if the claims were found to be true.

SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) provincial chairperson Nomarashiya Caluza said they welcomed the investigation, but hoped it would be extended to include other allegations.  

“There are serious issues there; there is the issue of transformation. The school is not transformed as there are very few black teachers. There are allegations that the SGB is paying some teachers more than others.

“We welcome the investigation. Heads must roll where corruption is found,” said Caluza. 

The provincial chief executive of the National Professional Teachers Union of South Africa, Thirona Moodley, said they wanted the ­department to act with urgency. 

“We reported the allegations about the school to the department last year, and nothing happened. The department digs a hole for themselves (by not acting). 

“By now the public money is gone,” she said. 
The Mercury