Durban - While the police are confident that they have a ­“watertight” case against Thabani Mzolo, the man accused of murdering his student ex-girlfriend, they are remaining tight-lipped about where Mzolo got the rifle that he allegedly used to shoot ­Zolile Khumalo.
On Workers’ Day, Mzolo is believed to have gone to the Lonsdale student residence in Durban’s CBD, where he allegedly shot and killed Khumalo.

Khumalo was a first-year quantity surveying student at the Mangosuthu University of Technology (MUT).  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

During the court proceedings, the State argued that Mzolo had supplied two home addresses. However, when verification was conducted at those homes, it was established that he did not live at either one. 
Also read: #ZolileKhumalo to be buried Saturday

It was also revealed that Mzolo had opted to seek the legal services of attorney, Charl Claasen.  A seven-day adjournment was ordered for Claasen to bring himself up to speed on the case . 

Addressing the media outside the Durban Magistrate’s Court where Mzolo appeared on Thursday, deputy police minister Bongani Mkongi said they could confirm that the police were working on linking Mzolo to other cases. 

“Through our investigations, we have found other activities that he is involved in. We are going to build a watertight case and make sure that he does not get bail,” he said. 

Mkongi declined to go into details on the rifle used to shoot Khumalo. 

He said that due to the case still being heard in court, the ­police would not divulge too much information about the investigation. 

Ammunition

“We do not want to give his defence ammunition against us. We know that the serial number on the firearm had been filed off. We are investigating if that firearm had been involved in any killings around KwaZulu-Natal, whether political killings or taxi violence,” Mkongi said. 

ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini was also present at the court, and addressed students who had gathered outside. She called for an end to violence against women. 

“No woman must be killed because she said no. Every woman has the right to say no. We call on the leadership of all organisations and all sectors to buy into the fight against women and children abuse,” Dlamini said. 

Khumalo’s aunt, Bongiwe Myeni, told reporters that the family was not aware that she and Mzolo had been in a relationship. “To us, she was a little baby. We found out at the time the incident happened,” she said. 

She added that the family had been inundated with messages of condolence and support, from fellow students and various government officials. 
The Mercury