Ethekweni Municipality mayor, Zandile Gumede, has mobilised the city's customer service units to go to the people with roadshows scheduled to take place at popular malls over the next three weeks 
Consumers will be given the opportunity to speak to municipal officials face-to-face and raise any issues or concerns.
The Mayor's office said that since the activation of this service in February more that 800 customers have been attended to successfully.
Also read: eThekwini residents owe billions in unpaid bills
From this weekend and over a three week period, customers would be able to engage with staff - onsite and online - from revenue, water, electricity, Sizakala Customer Care and the City Integrity and Investigation Unit. 

The following services will be on offer:


Revenue: accounts inquiries, consolidations, transfers, terminations, credit authorities and rebates to senior citizensWater: accounts inquiries, meter readings queries, water leaks and registration of water servicesElectricity: accounts inquiries, meter readings and checking of applications statusSizakala: any other municipal related services inquiries and employment application forms among other services that will be on offer.


Roadshow details: 

May 12-13 : 9am-6pm

Gateway Mall – Spar Court

Pavilion Mall – Game Court

Phoenix Plaza - Verimark Court

May 19-20: 9am-6pm

Galleria Mall – Dischem / Mr Price Court

Musgrave - Red Square Court

Bridge City - Shoprite Court

June 9-10: 9am-6pm

Mega City /Kwa Mnyandu 

Chatsworth Centre – Taxi Entrance

Hammarsdale – Spar / Pep Court
The Mayoral Hotline launched earlier this year was a positive step towards alleviating the frustrations and concerns raised by many residents. 
One particular area of concern raised was the implementation of the Revenue Management System (RMS) and the issues of inconsistent billing. 
"The implementation of RMS has seen several teething problems but like any new application, the initial challenges have been resolved. In the last ten months concerns and problems have been dealt with by the vendor and migration teams. The reading of meters and the upload and download of the read routes are being more stringently monitored. The current system is stable and correct bills are being generated," said Gumede.
Gumede said she wants to ensure that every customer that has concerns or queries attributed to their bill is resolved prior to the full implementation of RMS and the phase out of the old coins system in the next few months. 
Customers will be able to raise any utility service related query, update information, register on eServices and make payment arrangements for any outstanding accounts. 
Qualifying customers can also apply for a rates rebate or simply check if their current account is in order.
 For more information contact 080 311 11 11 (toll-free)
The Mercury