According to Stats SA 776 933 incidents of housebreaking or burglary, and 151 279 incidents of home robbery were recorded across South Africa in a one year period.

Community Active Protection(CAP) noted that there has been a significant spike in the number of housebreakings being committed by impostors.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Imposter crimes are when criminals pose as officials, contractors or delivery personnel, in order to gain access to a property explained Warwick Scott-Rodger, Executive Head of Dialdirect Insurance.
"The only way to prevent it is to advise everyone in your home to never open the gate or door to anyone unless the visit is pre-arranged and the person’s identity is confirmed,” said Scott-Rodger.

Even with scheduled visits, caution is urged.

“Confirm the name of the person who will be calling on your home beforehand so that you know exactly who to expect. If you cannot be home for the appointment, tell everyone in your household that you are expecting someone, advise them the name of the person and give them the phone number of the company they represent,” says Scott-Rodger.

Members of your household  should also be taught to never offer information, such as personal details or information about household routines or security, to anyone over the intercom. 
This kind of information in the wrong hands can be a security threat. 

Tips to avoid becoming a victim of a crime of deception:


Make sure that you do a thorough screening and reference check of all people you employ. A service like Managed Integrity Evaluation can assist with this. Be sure to make a copy of their ID document and proof of residence.It should also be stressed to young children that they should never open the gate remotely when the bell rings without first confirming over the intercom the visitor is.Insist that officials and service providers schedule appointments with you and that they specify who will be assigned to the job. When someone introduces themselves as an official from any service provider or authority, make sure that you thoroughly check their credentials.Where possible, all initial interactions should be conducted telephonically or over an intercom system, before engaging in person. A good CCTV and intercom system is a wise investment.Avoid leaving old bills, boxes of newly purchased goods and documentation containing personal information in the trash, especially if its easily accessible.Be sure to keep the numbers of all emergency service providers on hand. If you notice any suspicious activity, dial them immediately.  Technology like the Namola app, supported by Dialdirect, gets you direct contact to the emergency assistance you need within a matter of seconds.


“A healthy sense of scepticism can really go a long way and could end up saving more than just your possessions”, Scott-Rodger concludes. “It is also wise to make sure that your home contents and vehicles are comprehensively insured against these crimes.”