Durban - Different areas of Durban were rocked by service delivery protests on Monday, as community members blocked roads with stones, trees and burning tyres.
At 5am, about 200 community members blockaded Bellair Road and Jan Smuts Highway in Mayville.

Also around 5am, about 100 people blocked the R74 ­between Stanger and Maphumulo with stones and trees. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

In Inanda, angry residents held two protests.

In the first, a group of 50 people blocked M25 Curnick Ndlovu Highway, complaining about service delivery. 

Then in Bhambayi, in Dube Village, community members  demanded the removal of ward councillor Moses Zulu. They accused him of being rude and failing to address their needs.  

A community member, who asked not to be named, said: “All we want is service delivery, that is what he promised us when he was elected. But now when we remind him of his promises, he tells us he is not God and cannot make miracles happen.”

The source said that their area had not seen any development since 1994. 

“We live in squalid conditions. Shacks are built on top of each other, there is no space to even push a wheelbarrow in between these shacks,” he said.

But Zulu said the protest was not motivated by genuine concerns for service delivery. 

“There are two issues. There is the issue of development, where there are genuine concerns. The people concerned with services came to the meeting on Sunday, and the municipal officials addressed the issues. Those people were happy with what was announced. This (protest) is political. There are people who came to the meeting on Sunday with a political agenda. They came to disrupt the meeting and cause chaos. There are opposition parties in this ward (influencing this),” he said.

He added that some community members had even attacked his home. 

“A councillor does not build (community) houses - he has no money. My job is to chase after the city officials to get them to brief the community on developments. If this was really about service delivery, why would the public be marching to the councillor’s house?” he asked.

Ndabo Mzimela, of Abahlali baseMjondolo, said their members had blocked several areas in Mayville to protest as they were tired of being lied to by politicians.

“The community in Cato Crest is sick and tired of being lied to by politicians. They want services to be provided to them now,” he said. 

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said there had been no arrests or damage to property reported in any of the incidents. 
The Mercury