Durban - Two years after a fire killed eight children at the Lakehaven Child and Youth Care Centre, a new cottage has been built, thanks to a R2.5million donation from the Sibaya Community Trust.
The fully furnished four-
bedroom cottage has 12 beds with fireproof mattresses as part of its safety measures. 

It was officially opened by King Goodwill Zwelithini at the weekend. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Eight children, aged between eight and 21, died in the July 2016 inferno. A garden of remembrance in their honour was also unveiled at the event. 

Speaking at the event, a trustee of the Sibaya Community Trust, Vivian Reddy, described the fire as a horrific blow for the centre.

“We were galvanised, along with many others, to be part of the restoration story of Lakehaven. The trustees of the Sibaya Community Trust pledged to rebuild the cottage and create a reflective space where the community of Lakehaven could remember the children, the precious flowers that were lost in this tragedy. We as business do not stand by when we see headlines, we act,” said Reddy. 

Tristan Kaatze, chair of the trust, called on civic organisations like Child Welfare Durban and District (CWDD), business and the Department of Social Development to work together to care for the vulnerable. 

Funding

“We need to use funding models and legislation to give life to the rights we have envisaged in our constitution for the children for whom we are gathered here today,” said Kaatze. 

Describing the cottage and the garden of remembrance, architect Ashwin Ramroop, the ;founder of Germants Projects, said: “Its direction is such that it brings peace, serenity and calm it’s in a circular design to keep the peace within the garden. There are benches for people to sit and reflect, and behind each one is an olive tree to represent peace,” he said.

The children who died are memorialised in a plaque bearing their names. 

Premier Willies Mchunu praised Reddy, calling him one of South Africa’s “illustrious sons” for for having the ­“vision, ability and plan to ­intervene”.

Social Development MEC Weziwe Thusi described Reddy and the trust as catalysts for change. While the Lakehaven fire was a painful experience, Thusi said she was glad that lessons were learnt and measures implemented to ensure such a tragedy did not happen again. 

CWDD president Rajan Pillay said while he had not seen the full report, he was told the fire was ruled an accident. 

Since the tragedy, he said, they had refreshed their protocols and implemented safety programmes, including evacuation drills. 

“The Edith Benson Baby Home was badly burnt in February. Sad as it was, we’re glad to say not a single child was injured; with 55 children evacuated in a matter of 10 minutes. That in itself speaks volumes in terms of the inroads we have made,” said Pillay. 

Also expressing his gratitude, Pillay said while they were partially funded by the Department of Social Development, they relied heavily on the business community to assist them to look after the well-being of children. 

The king said he was amazed by the number of charitable acts of the trust. 

“Their generosity has brought smiles to the faces and joy to the hearts of thousands of people who would otherwise have suffered greater.”

He challenged business in KZN to follow the trust’s example. The king donated an ox for the children of Lakehaven.

Sibaya trustee Judge Vuka Shabalala expressed gratitude to the board and staff of CWDD and “all those working in the frontlines of childcare”.
The Mercury