The DA is going full steam ahead with its campaign to warn voters that they will lose their land and homes if they allow the ANC and EFF to amend the constitution to ­enable land expropriation without compensation.
The warning is part of the DA’s bid to win next year’s general elections.

The campaign is in response to the ANC’s Nasrec conference resolution to amend the country’s constitution to expropriate land without compensation. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The main opposition party also said the EFF wanted the constitution amended so that “even if you own a house or a flat the government will own it, and you will have to rent it”.

The party has distributed pamphlets around Kwa­Zulu-Natal warning homeowners against the proposals.

“We must stop the ANC and EFF from opening the floodgates of expropriation,” the pamphlet reads.

DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango said the campaign started when the ANC conference took the resolution on land expropriation.

However, EFF deputy secretary Hlengiwe Hlophe-Mkhaliphi accused the DA of peddling election propaganda. She said her party, if it won the elections, would not take over people’s private houses.  

Hlophe-Mkhaliphi said the current property clause mostly protected white people as they dominated land ownership.

“We are not planning to ­expropriate houses,” she said.

She said the EFF had proposed that the land on which a private house was built should in future be owned by the state, which would reduce bonds that people owed to the banks.

“You are going to tell the bank to categorise the money that you are owing and remove the part of the portion you are paying for the land, which will have been expropriated, and therefore the house is going to be cheaper.

“If our proposal is adopted you are only going to own the top structure, and not the land,” she said.

She added that Parliament was criss-crossing the country conducting public hearings on land expropriation, with hearings expected to be held in Durban next month.  

Mncwango said it was impractical for a person to own a home without owning the land.

“If you own a property you don’t own only a house because the property value is counted according to the size of your plot, which is the land.

“How do you go to the bank to ask for a loan if you don’t own the plot where your house is built?” asked Mncwango.

Political analyst Bheki Mngomezulu said the proposals had not referred to houses being taken away from their owners.

“If you did that it would be disruptive, which is what the government is trying to avoid,” he said.

The ANC could not be reached for comment.
The Mercury