The KwaZulu-Natal Philharmonic Orchestra has announced details of its 2018 Winter Season. It will run in the Playhouse Opera Theatre, each Thursday, between June 7 and 28, starting at 7.30pm. The season is part of the Orchestra’s renowned World Symphony Series (WSS) launched in Durban 22 years ago.
Associated guest conductor Daniel Boico launches the season with Beethoven’s powerful Egmont Overture. Written to accompany a performance of Goethe’s drama of the same title, it is one of the last works of the composer’s middle period, similar in style to the Fifth Symphony which predated it by two years. A superb showcase for award-winning Italian virtuoso, Antonio Pompa-Baldi, the statuesque grandeur of Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No 3 in C minor promises to be an exciting centrepiece, and concludes with a performance of Symphony No 1 by Russian composer Alexander Borodin. 

Conductor Brandon Philips makes his bow on the podium on June 14 with a programme of 19th century German and French repertoire. Robert Schumann’s Overture to his only opera, Genoveva, makes a welcome appearance as the evening’s curtain raiser, before the renowned Russian soloist, Alexander Buzlov takes the spotlight to perform Édouard Lalo Cello Concerto in D minor. Brahms’s Symphony No 3 rounds of the programme.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Pretoria-born maestro Conrad van Alphen opens his programme on June 21 with Mendelssohn’s mercurial Midsummer Night’s Dream Overture. Celebrated Russian soloist Nikita Boriso-Glebsky takes on the challenges of Sibelius’s towering Violin Concerto, and the season’s third programme rounds off with Dvorák: Symphony No 5 in F Major Op 76.

The season concludes with Norwegian conductor Cathrine Winnes on the podium for a programme featuring Beethoven’s Fidelio Overture, Mendelssohn’s Italian Symphony, and a potpourri of vocal music. This showcases a quartet of soloists headed by soprano Nozuko Teto, with four of Durban’s finest choirs - Prince Mshiyeni, Thokozani Choral Society, Clermont Community and the Durban Symphonic. Two great Handel items - the imposing Coronation anthem, Zadok the Priest, and Merab’s haunting aria, Author of Peace, from the oratorio Saul - combine with the deeply moving Lacrimosa from Mozart’s Requiem and Haydn’s exhilarating The Heavens Are Telling from The Creation - to offset three visceral contemporary items by South Africa composers. An uplifting end.

Season tickets and booking for individual concerts through Computicket. Call 0861 915 8000 or book online at www.computicket.com. For more info call 0313699438, e-mail bookings@kznphil.org.za or visit www.kznphil.org.za.

On the solo recital front, pianist Christopher Duigan turns his hand to a programme, 20 Not So Popular Piano Solos engaging with his followers of admirers in various centres of the province during May. Duigan will introduce items seen as popular, but are no less varied, engaging and appealing. From his vast repertoire, through his more than 40 years of piano study, from the great world wide web and scores collected from libraries from around the world, he brings to audiences an exciting and enlightening selection. 

For those wanting to discover more, this will be chance to enjoy the curious stories that accompany many of the pieces, insightful observation from the performer’s view and personal anecdotes presented in the manner for which he has become known. The selection include Bach’s Goldberg Aria, Liszt’s Un susprio, The Lark by Balakierev, Automne by Cecile Chaminade, music from the four corners of the earth, from film scores and a few misfits.

Performances will take place as follows: 20 Not So Popular Piano Solos: Thursday, May 24, 7pm, Grace Hall Ashton International College, Albertina Way, Ballito (opp Ballito Hospital); Tuesday, May 29, 7.30pm, St Agnes Church, Kloof; Friday, June 1, 7.45pm at Casa Mexicana, 35 Montgomery Drive, Athlone, Pietermaritzburg; Highgate Wine Estate, 1 Dargle Road, Midlands, Saturday, June 2, 6.30pm; Sunday June 3,11.30am, Tatham Art Gallery, Pietermaritzburg. Booking is preferred: booking@musicrevival.co.za or music revival 0834174473 (SMS or WhatsApp only).