Durban - The National Council of SPCAs says it will lay animal cruelty charges against the SANDF after the discovery of starving horses at an army unit in Potchefstroom.
“The NSPCA is in the process of laying charges against the SANDF regarding the neglect of horses,” said communications manager Meg Wilson. “We will be laying the charges this week.

“The reason (for the delayed laying of charges) being, we do not simply go into a police station and lay the charges. We form a docket for the SAPS.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Last month, NSPCA inspectors found 169 horses, some of them starving, at the SA Army Special Infantry Capability unit.

Read: NSPCA to lay charges against SANDF

“Twenty-five horses on the army base were in such an emaciated condition or compromised state of health that to prevent further suffering, they had to be put down,” lamented the NSPCA in an earlier statement.

Responding, the SANDF said its chief Solly Shoke had ordered the relocation of 80 of its horses from the Potchefstroom-based army unit and also confirmed that 25 of its horses were euthanised “due to compromised health”.

The SANDF said it had roped in the Military Veterinary Institute to assess conditions in which the animals are kept. A board of inquiry was established to determine who should bear responsibility “for the mistreatment of the four-legged soldiers”.

However, the NSPCA said it was not aware of the inquiry.

“The chief of the SANDF, to whom we addressed the letter, has neither acknowledged receipt thereof nor has he responded in any way to the serious concerns that we raise. So we haven’t been involved in that process,” said Wilson.

The South African National Defence Union said that “the issue of the horses is kept very secret”.

“Animals are vulnerable to the poor supply chain management of the SA army which is legendary in either paying suppliers late or not at all.

“This leaves the soldiers on the ground unable to tend to animals and places them in a precarious position,” said the national secretary, Pikkie Greeff.

“Command and control mechanisms are poor, and therefore everyone down the chain of command suffers, including the animals.”
The Mercury