A well known and loved Nirvana Hills, in Northdene, Durban, woman was bludgeoned to death during a home invasion Monday.
Dolly Shumugum, 56, was home alone when two men allegedly made their way into her house, robbed her and bludgeoned her to death with a pair of garden shears. 

Police Captain Nqobile Gwala said Shumugum was killed at around 3pm on Monday.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Gwala said police were still combing the scene at the time of publication last night, with shocked neighbours gathered around. 

“A woman was killed when the suspects accosted her at her house in Schooldale Drive in Nirvana Hills. 

“Malvern police are still at the scene. We will provide further information as soon as we receive it,” Gwala said.

Shumugum was well known among the local community for her charitable deeds and missionary work to homeless people on South Beach where she and her husband Jonathan Shumugum regularly fed them.

Jonathan and his son-in-law discovered her body on Monday.

“I am very distraught right now. I can’t believe what happened,” Jonathan said.

“I was at work and my son-in-law came home to bring some curry to drop off. He saw the gate was open and wondered why it was open and then he saw blood and he called me to leave work and come quickly,” Jonathan said.

“My wife was diabetic and sometimes her sugar level goes down and I thought that maybe she had fainted,” he said.

But he arrived home to a grisly, bloodied scene to find his wife’s body lying lifeless in the lounge.

Jonathan said his wife attended Jesus Hope of the Nations church and had always helped him with his lay ministry and feeding of homeless people on South Beach.

Close family friend, Visvin Reddy, who attended the scene to assist the family last night said Dolly would be remembered as a “very religious, very friendly” person.

“They were a lovely couple. She always had a smile and was always ready to reach out to those in need and she shared her husband’s passion to help those in need.

“The community is in shock. More and more people are gathering here and speaking in hushed tones that they are not safe in their own homes anymore,” Reddy said.