Durban - What does an Irish singer have in common with a golf legend? Well, aside from their dapper looks, both share a deep passion for assisting the community. 

On Saturday, Ronan Keating and Gary Player embraced their competitive natures and each captained a team of golfers in an 18-hole shootout at Westlake Golf Club on Saturday as part of the A Night with Ronan Keating presented by Citadel charity initiative. The pair had agreed to team up to raise R1-million for children battling cancer.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Team Player and Team Keating included a host of VIP golfers on either side, and it was Team Keating that emerged victorious, beating their opponents 161-145.

The golf followed the successful charity auction at the One&Only in Cape Town where R1-million was raised in aid of the Gary Player Foundation as well as the Ronan Keating Foundation’s selected beneficiary, The Red Cross War Memorial Children’s Hospital Oncology Unit.



“I love South Africa and it was such a fabulous day in Cape Town with beautiful weather. We all had a lot of fun out there. Everybody was still in such good spirits after raising so much for the foundations,” said Keating.

"This was the first event of our foundation and I just feel so grateful that we could raise as much as we did. I visited the children at the Red Cross War Memorial Children’s Hospital and it’s just heartbreaking to see. I lost my own mother to cancer and you never get over that loss. We knew so little about cancer when we went through that process, and I don’t want other people to be in the same position. The message is that with early detection and proper treatment cancer can be overcome. This event was the first step in our goal to achieving this.”

Player, whose own foundation has raised over $64 million worldwide for charity, said he was delighted to help his good friend with such a worthy cause.

“Ronan has been such a great supporter of our Gary Player Invitational charity tournaments and it’s wonderful see him giving back in this way and to be a part of that. I was giving Ronan a few tips on the range before the golf started and I must say I was worried then already because he was hitting it miles," he said. 
The Ronan Keating Foundation is managed through the Citadel Philanthropy Fund, and Citadel CEO Andrew Möller said they were equally pleased with the important contribution made through this event.

“It’s a great privilege for us to be able to facilitate the start of such an initiative with the first event in South Africa and to be partnering with somebody as passionate as Ronan, who is making a contribution in our country to people who so desperately need this support," Möller said.
The Mercury