Corruption Watch has welcomed news that suspended Sars commissioner Tom Moyane will face disciplinary charges, but maintained that criminal investigations and prosecutions should still take place.
“Disciplinary charges should have happened ages ago; it should be the least of his worries, because he should be facing criminal charges. We asked the NPA to give us a certificate if they are not going to prosecute, so that we can prosecute criminal charges ourselves,” Corruption Watch executive director David Lewis said. 

Corruption Watch laid fraud and corruption charges against Moyane Jonas Makwakwa and Kelly-Ann Elskie in December 2016. The charges highlighted apparent breaches of Section 34 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act as well as sections of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Wayne Duvenage, of the  Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (OUTA), said: “We are delighted that Tom Moyane is facing disciplinary action. There is too much smoke surrounding Moyane’s tenure at the helm of Sars, and since his appointment by former president Zuma several years ago, we have seen this once highly regarded institution lose ground on its tax collection rates and a decline in its efficacy. 

“Many connected people and entities who owe Sars billions of rands have been allowed to slip through the tax net. Talent has been purged and specialised collection units within Sars have lost their skills. And  to crown it all, favourable and fast VAT refunds that transgress Sars’ own rules have been paid out to Gupta-linked companies. Tom Moyane is a disgrace to this government and this country. He must face  not only an internal disciplinary hearing, but also the full might of the law.”

The charges were served on Moyane on Thursday, and relate to alleged misconduct in violation of his duties and responsibilities in terms of the SA Revenue Service Act, Public Finance Management Act and Sars Code of Conduct, President Cy-
ril Ramaphosa’s office said. 

Retired Constitutional Court Judge Kate O’Regan will be the presiding officer for the disciplinary inquiry.

The Presidency said in a separate process, a commission of inquiry would be established to probe tax administrative issues like VAT refunds and shortfalls in revenue in the past two financial years.