Durban - Senior eThekwini officials were held against their will in their offices on Wednesday, ­allegedly by armed men ­demanding payments owed to contractors and subcontractors responsible for refuse removal in some of Durban’s townships.
eThekwini spokesperson Mandla Nsele confirmed the incident, saying that while no one had been injured, the three officials who had been held against their will were “threatened and emotionally abused”.

Police rushed to the Durban Solid Waste (DSW) headquarters in Springfield to defuse the tense situation, where the intruders were demanding payment.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Sources said two men had entered the building and later locked three officials in the boardroom on the second floor. Another source claimed that the men were accompanied by about 15 others who did not enter the building.

“They (the two men) came in there and locked the officials (in) the boardroom on the second floor. They were demanding payment for work done in April, and that they be given guarantees that they will be paid for work to be done in May and June when the waste refusal contract comes to an end,” said a source.

It is believed that at least one of them was carrying a firearm. After the situation was defused, a policeman was seen by The Mercury removing a firearm from the building.

The fracas started at about 10am when the men, who are ­believed to be contractors who service the northern townships, entered the building.

Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said a case of intimidation had been opened at Sydenham police station.

While The Mercury witnessed two men being led into the back of a police van, Mbhele said no one had been arrested.

This was the second time in just two weeks that angry contractors stormed the DSW offices to ­demand payment from the city.

The Mercury understands that one of the senior officials had to receive trauma counselling last night, while DSW staff were 
also said to be scared to return to work.

Nsele said the city would be implementing measures to ensure the safety of staff.

The latest encounter appeared to contradict the council’s statement - issued 18 hours earlier - that “administrative issues that the city had with contractors had been resolved” and that service had ­resumed in townships such as ­uMlazi.

A contractor, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the city had not honoured its promise. 

“We still have not been paid. They are lying. That is why people were angered when the city claimed that the impasse had been resolved,” said the contractor.

Probed on this, Nsele yesterday conceded that funds were still owed to contractors.

“Yes, there is money that is due to contractors because of inadequate documentation provided by them. Payment to contractors must be made within 30 days, and the outstanding amounts are still within this period,” said Nsele.

“The city pays for services that have been adequately delivered. If the services have been provided to the satisfaction of the munici­pality and the residents, and ­appropriate documentation for processing payment is provided, the municipality will honour its obligations,” Nsele said.

The contract for waste removal in townships has been a major source of controversy for the council. 

In January, contractors went on the rampage in uMlazi, strewing litter on the streets, after not being paid. This was after the R45million budget, set aside for six months, was depleted in just two months.

The contracts also caused ructions at City Hall as some city officials warned that it could drain 
the fiscus as it allows the main 
contractors to claim for waste removal at illegal dumping sites, but does not put a cap on how much can be claimed.
The Mercury