Durban - Msunduzi Municipality senior manager Madeleine Jackson has been vindicated of all charges against her and has returned to her post, in the municipal manager's office, two years after her suspension.
Jackson was suspended in 2016 and, after four months of not knowing the reasons behind her axing, she was served with nine charges. 

She was accused of failing to execute her duties as a project manager, destroying evidence related to fruitless and wasteful expenditure and irregular employee appointments among others. 
However, two years and a number of hearings later, Jackson was cleared of all charges after the municipality failed to provide evidence on the charges against her. 
“It is a feeling of redemption and exoneration. I never doubted that I would eventually be cleared of everything as I always maintained that the charges wouldn't stick,” Jackson said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Since December 2016, she has been in a number of hearings “but there was not much progress”.
Further particulars, which included the laptop which was used by Jackson during her employment, were requested by her legal representative in order to allow her to further prepare her defence, but it was discovered that the laptop was “lost”.
Her legal representative then made an application for the withdrawal of charges, mainly on the basis of undue and unreasonable delays, allegations of procedural flaws, as well as allegations of unjust administrative action, on the part of the municipality.

According to the judgment in Jackson's matter, “the employer's representative attempted to oppose certain parts of the application but could not fully dispute the basis of the application, leaving the decision to the chairperson, who ruled in her favour”. 
Jackson said she felt “free” after being cleared of all charges and the suspension hung over her “like a black cloud”.
After returning to Pietermaritzburg City Hall Jackson said it was “very different” as many of those she worked closely with were no longer employed by the municipality. 

 kailene.pillay@inl.co.zaAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury