Durban - The families of two men who were burnt to death want justice served to their alleged killer.
Mxolisi Mkhize, 31, and Moses Magama, 34, were allegedly set alight by their boss, a tow truck owner, who accused them of stealing a gearbox, in Mariannhill, last week.

They were allegedly assaulted, doused with petrol and set alight while their hands were tied.
They died in hospital after suffering severe burns to their bodies.
Mkhize’s mother, Busisiwe said she would always be haunted by the image of her son.

“On the day he was admitted in hospital, my brother warned me not to visit because he knew I would be traumatised. But I couldn’t hold myself back, I wanted to see my son. I went inside and I couldn’t believe my eyes. “His flesh was pink like a pig and his head was swollen,” said Mkhize.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“He couldn’t move or talk, he became someone I didn’t know.
“I looked next to his bed , our neighbour Moses who was also burnt was there. He was also in a serious condition but at least he could talk.

“What irks me about this thing, is that as soon as I heard about it, I went to his (the accused) house as I couldn’t find my son. They denied that anything happened there even when I went back the second time. I only found out later that my son was in hospital. He told me he rescued them from a shack that caught fire,” said Mkhize. This week, the accused Mthokozisi Mbambo, 37, was granted bail in the Pinetown Magistrate’s court. He faced two counts of murder. The matter was adjourned until November 28.
Mbambo employed Mkhize and Magama at his tow truck business to wash vehicles. The trouble allegedly began when he questioned them about a missing gearbox. They allegedly denied knowing anything about it.
He allegedly stuffed them into the car boot, and drove them to different scrap yards to find out where they had sold it. Magama’s sister who did not want to be named said they were still grieving.

“I don’t know what kind of a human being would do such an evil thing. Imagine the pain they suffered.
“Moses said he didn’t know anything about the gearbox they were accused of stealing.
“Even if my brother had survived, he wouldn’t have been normal.

“I just want the law to take its course and justice to prevail,” she said.
Sunday Tribune