Durban - After six years of delays and 18 court appearances by the accused, the criminal trial against members of the Cato Manor Violent Crimes Unit is nowhere near ready for trial.
The Durban High Court yesterday set October 4, 2019, as the date for the start of the trial to allow for the finalisation of a number of applications relating to the case.

The accused, who include former head of Hawks in KwaZulu-Natal Johan Booysen, were in court yesterday for their application to have the matter struck off the roll because they argued that the delays have been “unexceptionally lengthy and unreasonable”.
The accused have been indicted on a total of 116 different counts, which include 28 counts of housebreaking and murder, six counts of theft, 22 counts of defeating the ends of justice and two counts of racketeering.

Representing the men, advocate Anton Katz SC argued in court yesterday that his clients have appeared in court 18 times since their arrest in 2012, describing the delays as unreasonable and prejudicial to them. 
In court papers, the accused say that by asking for a stay of prosecution they are not trying to avoid prosecution, but merely contend that they should be brought to court at a time when the State is ready to proceed with the prosecution.

Sello Maema, the advocate for the State, told the court the prosecution was ready to proceed with the matter and has been ready since February 5, 2013, when the matter came to the high court roll for the first time.
“It was on the accused’s request that the matter was postponed to May 9, 2013, and to November 18, 2013, for disclosures of the contents of the dockets,” the State says in court papers.

The State blames the delays on the civil challenges brought by the accused relating to the racketeering charges.
In 2013, Booysen challenged the racketeering authorisations issued by advocate Nomgcobo Jiba, then acting national director of public prosecutions.

The judge ruled in favour of Booysen, saying the decision to charge him with racketeering was irrational.
Other accused then launched a similar challenge in July 2015, and the state argued that the separate challenges to the authorisations constituted delaying tactics by the accused.

The accused argue that they cannot be criticised for seeking to set aside “irrational decisions”.
The judge said he would decide on the matter of the accused’s application after a condonation application had been heard on Friday. 

The condonation application relates to the State’s application to be allowed to file supplementary documents in relation to the other accused challenging the Jiba authorisations.
The Mercury