Durban - The eThekwini Municipality’s executive committee has approved a proposal to secure a R1billion loan for capital expenditure as officials warn that without this some service delivery programmes will either be disrupted or postponed.
However, opposition parties rejected the proposed borrowing, saying that in the current economic climate the move was reckless, and that the municipality should rather be focusing on improving its debt collection.

City treasurer Krish Kumar told members of the Executive Committee that if the city did not borrow the R1bn it would have to reduce its R7bn capital budget for the 2018/2019 financial year. 
He said that while the city had about R6.2bn in cash reserves, that was a cushion to fund the capital programmes.
In the last credit rating conducted by Global Credit Rating, the metro was found to be in a healthy financial status and moved up a notch to a rating of AA+ (ZA) up from AA (ZA). 

The executive committee’s decision is the first step in a long process to secure the loan, which includes inviting tenders from financial institutions and getting approval from the national and provincial Treasury departments.
This was the second time this year the issue of a R1bn loan came before the committee. In February the full council approved a R1bn loan for capital budgets. In March 2015 the municipality secured a R1bn loan from Nedbank. By law the municipality can only borrow to fund capital budgets.
The DA voted against the loan, while the IFP’s sole representative, Mdu Nkosi, abstained.

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said that with low collection rates it was not advisable to borrow. She said that due to the current economic climate more and more ratepayers were finding it hard to meet their commitments. 
“Even more concerning is that our rates base is only growing because the evaluations have increased property rates,” she said.
Mdu Nkosi of the IFP warned that servicing a R1bn loan would prove costly for the city. 

“Yes, we want service delivery, but let us use what we have. Are we saying that we are different from other metros? The answer is no,” he said.
Mondli Mthembu, an ANC councillor, said the loan item was included in the Medium Term Revenue and Expenditure Framework (MTREF) budget approved in the presence of opposition councillors in May last year.
“All that the officials are doing now is outlining a process to us.” 

Mthembu said the DA-run City of Cape Town was borrowing about R4bn in the MTREF.
The ANC’s Barbara Fortein said the loan would ease the burden on ratepayers in that it would be paid over a long term.
Kumar conceded that the rates base was not growing as much as the city would like, adding that the increase was at about 2% and was due to an increase in property valuations.

He said the intention of improving infrastructure was to grow the economy and attract investors.
He added that the city had done its best to improve its debt collection, and that collection rates had improved considerably from last year. 
The Mercury