DURBAN - A liquidated ANC Youth League (ANCYL) does not bode well for the ruling party before next year’s general elections, according to political analysts.
The financial affairs of the league took centre stage at the Durban High Court on Friday during a matter involving the ANCYL and the civic organisation, Active Citizens Movement (ACM).

The ACM brought an application in April last year to prevent the Youth League from disrupting a memorial service it had organised for ANC stalwart Ahmed Kathrada.
Despite an order being in place, the memorial descended into chaos with speakers being booed.
In May last year, the ACM brought contempt of court proceedings against the ANCYL. It asked that the ANCYL apologise to the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, Kathrada family, the public, pay ACM’s legal fees and donate to a charitable organisation.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

For 18 months the matter was in and out of court as the league failed to comply with various rules and orders.
On Friday, the matter had to be postponed indefinitely because the league said it had been liquidated and could not meet the ACM’s demands.
According to media reports, the league was declared bankrupt by the Johannesburg High Court in July.

The organisation, which was founded in 1944, was the political cradle for several prominent leaders, among them Anton Lembede, Nelson Mandela, Jackie Selebi, Peter Mokaba, and Julius Malema.
Ben Madokwe, the chairperson of the ACM, said in court documents that despite the liquidation order, the youth league was conducting business as normal.
“The offices of the ANCYL remain open, preparations are being made for the holding of its national conference, salaries are being paid to the officials and staff.”

ACM spokesperson Yashica Padia said: “Let the whole country see what the once proud ANCYL has become.
“Nelson Mandela, Anton Lembede, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo must be turning in their graves if they saw what the organisation that they founded has become.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Njabulo Nzuza, secretary-general of the youth league, said: “The process of rescinding the order that liquidates us is ongoing. Our lawyers are working on it and, therefore, I would not like to comment about it.”

The league has postponed its national conference three times as a result of its financial woes.
The conference is now set for December.
Analysts said the plight of the league had resulted in the ANC losing tertiary institutions to the EFF.

Sandile Dlamini, a student leader at Mangosuthu University of Technology, confirmed this.
“We didn’t have support from the youth league. We didn’t have T-shirts and we couldn’t even bring in a single artist to campus to get hype going ahead of the election,” he said.
Professor Bheki Mngomezulu, politics lecturer at UWC, said: “Obviously, the liquidation does not bode well for the mother body as the elections are drawing closer.

“The youth league must be able to do its own electioneering campaigns to woo the youth. As things stand, they can’t do that.
“It is a recipe for disaster because these are future leaders.”
Another political analyst, Dr Somadoda Fikeni, said: “The image of the ANC Youth League has been dented. They will no longer be able to go to a bank or a lender because no one will trust them”.

He added it was a concern that those who led the youth league could not manage finances.
“The youth league adopted the culture of factionalism and neglected the issues that are faced by the youth,” he said.
Sunday Tribune