Durban - Sleet and possible light snow may fall along parts of the N3 toll road to Johannesburg from tonight and travellers have been warned to take precautions on the major freeway. 
According to the N3 Toll Concession (N3TC), areas that may be affected include Harrismith, Van Reenen’s Pass, Mooi River, Ladysmith and the KZN Midlands. 

“With the increased possibility of sleet and snow, roads and traffic may be affected causing back-ups and delays. It is advisable that travellers either delay their journeys or be prepared for demanding travelling conditions,” said Con Roux, N3TC commercial manager on Wednesday afternoon.
He added, “We will make every attempt to ensure general safety along the N3 toll route and in the interests of safety, may have to close parts of the route should road conditions become too dangerous. Transport and logistics operators, especially those with livestock and perishable loads should be aware that road closures may occur.”

Roux further confirmed that concession's Incident Management team, as well as all emergency and law enforcement services, were on alert and ready to provide support where and when required. 
“Our ability to address difficult situations and clear the route as quickly as possible depends heavily on the compliance of road users,” he said. 

Snow Report SA said that snowfalls are expected on the Drakensberg peaks Wednesday evening and by midday Thursday it will have spread down to southern Drakensberg, with some light flurries expected in Rosetta and Nottingham Road. 
“Snow in these areas could continue through most of the afternoon, on and off, and Underberg and the Drakensberg Gardens area could get some snow in the afternoon. We could also see some snow pushing into the Midlands in the Dargle/Impendle area on the high ground during tomorrow afternoon, but at this stage, it is expected to be quite light, and confined to the high ground. Heavy snow is likely in the afternoon and into the evening on the high Drakensberg, mainly focused on the southern and central Berg, with some moderate falls over the northern Drakensberg,” stated their latest forecast. 

 Independent on Saturday