Durban - Varsity College has approached the courts to have wording in the Attorneys Act and the Legal Practice Act declared unconstitutional.
This follows an impasse with the KZN Law Society over the body’s refusal to have the institution’s LLB graduates admitted for articles.

The institution has filed a Rule 16A notice with the high court asking that it declare the use of the word “university” in both acts unconstitutional.
Felicity Coughlan, the director of the Independent Institute of Education (IIE), said the private institution is willing to go to the Constitutional Court if need be and was confident that it will prevail. Varsity College is a brand of the IIE.

The latest court action follows an application the institution lodged at the Pietermaritzburg High Court to set aside a decision by the KZN Law Society not to recognise Varsity College’s LLB degree as sufficient for entry into the attorneys’ profession. 
The law society’s decision was based on its interpretation of the two acts which state that a prospective candidate applying to serve articles or to be admitted as an attorney must have satisfied all the requirements for an LLB degree from “any university in the Republic”. The word “university” in both acts is the main bone of contention as Varsity College is not designated as a university.

Varsity College is the only private institution of higher learning accredited and registered to offer a four-year LLB programme, which was granted last year. 
The IIE believes sections of the acts fail to make provisions for its inclusion and for its LLB degree and argues that such exclusions violates the rights of the institution and its students.

In the Pietermaritzburg court matter, Judge Piet Koen made a prima facie observation that Varsity College had presented a “persuasive case for the words of “any university in the Republic’ to be struck and or set aside as unconstitutional” although he said this should not be construed as a definitive finding.
Koen adjourned the application to allow the IIE to supplement its papers.

Coughlan said the matter has been set down for hearing on October 30. She said the institution had been communicating with students and families since the beginning of the year.
“Fortunately, few of them have been influenced by the miscommunication in the media, particularly social media, on this matter,” she said.

One parent is, however, not convinced and has served summons on the institution.
Sunil Singh, an attorney and father of Tasmika, who did one year of BCom Law at Varsity College, states in the summons the institution’s conduct in offering the relevant law degrees were based on “a false, fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation” that the degrees would enable his daughter to practice law in South Africa.

Coughlan accused Singh of using the situation for his own purposes.
“We have already lodged an exception to the vague and embarrassing legal papers he served on us and we are considering acting more directly against his inflammatory and false comments.”

The Mercury