Durban - A 17-year-old matric pupil from Lihithemba Senior Secondary School impressed the audience with her outstanding performance of opera singing at the Durban ICC’s 21st Anniversary Gala Dinner on Saturday night.
Nontobeko Bhengu, from Ndwedwe, who is currently studying for her matric exams, said her performance of the Italian classic O Mio Babbino Caro at the ICC was her best performance.

“I’ve wanted to be an opera singer from a young age, it’s my dream. I become so happy on stage when people like my performance because I want to show them my talent,” she said.
The self-taught singer said she began singing at the age of seven in the school choir.
One of the guests at the event, former eThekwini speaker Logie Naidoo, said he was impressed with the young soprano’s “commanding voice” and “rich talent”.

“She was in a big white gown that covered the whole stage and sang with such a commanding voice. There was continuous applause after her performance,” said Naidoo.

 

Evan Roberts, creative director of Makulu Events, first met Nontobeko about four years ago when he was asked to take a chance on the unknown talent for the provincial sports awards. Roberts said he tracked her down and asked her to perform during rehearsal at the ICC.
“She arrived with her mother and teacher, without a pianist or track, so I accompanied her on piano,” said Roberts.
He said there were about 100 people setting up at the ICC at that time and everyone stopped what they were doing and watched as she started singing.

“As I listened, I got so emotional and started tearing up. I instantly recognised her talent and that she was someone really special. She received a standing ovation at that event,” said Roberts.
“My biggest wish is that this girl gets somewhere. She has the potential to be an international star,” he said.
The theatrical director of Kickstart Theatre, Steven Stead - who worked at the English national opera for 10 years and is a passionate fan of opera - said Nontobeko was a remarkable natural talent that occurred “once in a blue moon”. 

“I hope she gets to study at Cape Town Opera School and nurtures that talent so that she can still be singing and wowing the world in 50 years’ time,” Stead said.

 





 karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury