Durban - After downing tools on Monday a group of Durban Metro Police officers have returned to work as the department’s leadership yesterday committed to address their grievances.
 Head of Metro Police, Steve Middleton, yesterday held meetings with union representatives to give feedback on the grievances which had been referred to him on Monday.

 When approached by The Mercury yesterday Middleton would not give details about how each of the grievances was being dealt with saying he had given feedback to the officers and their representatives.
 He said the representatives had tabled three new issues which he still had to deal with.
 Asked whether any action would be taken against the officers who embarked on a strike given that as part of essential services they cannot go on strike, Middleton said the officers had denied there was a strike.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 “There are anomalies in terms of the accusation flying around. For example the members say they were locked outside the gates and they were never on strike," he said. 
 Jaycee Ncanana the provincial secretary of the South African Municipal Workers Union also denied their members had gone on a strike saying it was merely “action meant to draw the attention of management”  to issues at Albert Park station.
 “The interpretation of management is that it was an unprotected strike but we are saying it was not a strike but action meant to draw attention to some of the issues. If people did not take part on this type of action Middleton would not have gone there to address those issues," he said. 

 Ncanana said the union was satisfied with the commitment made by Middleton in dealing with issues.
 Ncanana said the undertakings made by Middleton included that there will be a fair allocation of cars to members at the station and that he will look into claims of racism.
The management had also committed to ensure that it will look into allegations that some of the people accused of serious offences such as losing official firearms were being treated with kid gloves.

Ncanana however warned that action similar to that taken by their members on Monday would resume should the management of the department not keep its word.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury