Durban - 150 minibus taxis  will parade through Durban’s central business district to the City Hall today to mark the beginning of the City’s public transport transformation programme.
 Ethekwini Municipality launched its Taxi Incentive Scheme, named Moja Cruise last year which is aimed at uplifting the minibus taxi industry by promoting safer public transport and business operations.


 Businesses, residents, motorists and commuters will be affected by temporary road closures in the CBD.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 “Dr Pixley KaSeme Street (formerly West) will be closed to traffic from Dr Yusuf Dadoo Street (formerly Grey) where the N3 intersects, up to Samora Machel Street (formerly Aliwal) at the City Hall on Monday, 29 October from 8:30am to 09:30 . Thereafter, limited lanes on Dr Pixley Kaseme Street outside the City Hall will be available from 09:30 to 11:30,”said the municipality in a road closure alert.
Related ArticlesMoja Cruise - A programme that rewards minibus taxi drivers
 During the parade the Metro police will indicate alternate routes for motorists.   “Citizens should also be mindful of a longer commute time on the roads that the vehicles will travel on to get to Dr Pixley KaSeme Street,”said the municipality.
 The route the taxis will take to the start of the parade is from the ICC into Bram Fischer Road, left into Soldier’s Way, then right into Monty Naicker and left into Yusuf Dadoo and left into Dr Pixley KaSeme Street.
 The initiative was designed in collaboration the Ethekwini Management Taxi Council and includes, improved customer care, assures roadworthy vehicles and promotes better driving.

 According to reports, the programme will effectively track vehicles and obtain feedback from the various structures like rank marshals, associations and state-of-the-art tracking systems. 
 In addition, commuters will be asked to rate their experiences. This will all feed into a system, which rewards the drivers and operators for excellence on a monthly basis.
 The Mercury