Durban - The State intends to add a charge of robbery with aggravating circumstances to the triple murder charges Colin Pillay already faces.
This was heard yesterday when Pillay made his second appearance in the Verulam Magistrate's Court. 

Pillay is charged with the murders of Jane, 44, Denisha, 22 and Rackelle, 16, Govindasamy who were found murdered in their Tasvir Mansions flat in Phoenix two weeks ago. 
Members of the media, who were barred from taking photographs of Pillay at his first court appearance because of a possible identity parade, were given permission to photograph him yesterday.

Pillay sat quietly in the dock and kept his head bowed while cameras clicked. 
But close family and friends of the victims, who were seated in the public gallery, angrily shouted at Pillay to raise his head and “show his face” before magistrate Ncumisa Gcolotela arrived in court. 

Pillay was supposed to apply for bail yesterday. 
However, after numerous delays, the case was adjourned to next Thursday. 

His attorney Chris Gounden said that he needed more time to consult and “receive proper and clear instructions” from Pillay after the State said it intended to add the aggravated robbery charge to the docket. 
State prosecutor Rakesh Singh also told the court that he was “extremely unhappy” with defence attorney Gounden's approach in dealing with the urgent matter. 

“This matter has been delayed since the morning,” Singh told the court at around 11am. 
Singh said the State alleges that the murders were premeditated, which makes it a schedule six offence.

This means that Pillay would have to prove there were exceptional circumstances that warranted his release on bail. Previously, Sagren Govindsamy - the husband and father of the murdered women - told the media that jewellery and cash were missing from their home. 
Hundreds of mourners attended the women's funeral at the Faith Revival Church in Phoenix on Saturday. 

Among them were pupils of the Rydalvale Secondary School, dressed in their uniforms, to pay their respects to their classmate, Rackelle. 
The Mercury