Durban - A teacher from the Zwelinjani High School in Msinga is allegedly on the run after he was involved in a car accident that killed two high school pupils.
It has been alleged that the teacher, who had been transporting five pupils in his VW Polo, was speeding and intoxicated at the time of the accident.

The two pupils, who have not been named, died when the teacher’s car veered off the road and crashed into the yard of one of the homes in the Ehlanzeni area on Saturday evening.
The pupils died at the scene and three others were taken to hospital. They were returning from a sports day at the time of the accident. 

 


Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said the police were still looking for the driver.
“A VW Polo vehicle with schoolchildren was travelling on Hholwane Road when the driver allegedly lost control of the vehicle and it overturned. 

“The driver fled the scene on foot. Two pupils aged 16 and 19 died, and the others were taken to hospital for medical attention. A case of culpable homicide has been opened,” she said.
Community members said prior to the accident, the vehicle and two other cars had been racing down the road.
The road is considered treacherous and residents said almost 10 cars had been involved in crashes there.

 


“The cars were racing and the Polo overtook both cars and, at the bottom of the road, the driver lost control and the vehicle flew over rocks and crashed nose-first into the yard of one of the homes,” said a community member, who asked not to be named.
“Liquor bottles were removed from the car and the driver was assisted by other teachers as they rushed him to ‘hospital’. It’s clear they were trying to get him away from the scene because the pupils were more seriously injured than he was. 

“What angers me most is the negligence of the teacher. It was a sports day, which means the teacher was still on duty and yet he exposed the children to alcohol,” said the source. 
Ward councillor Mthandeni Myeza said: “When I got to the scene later that afternoon, the car reeked of alcohol and there were containers of beer inside. I cannot say whether the teacher had been drinking or had bought the booze to drink at home.
“There is a strong suspicion within the community that alcohol may have been a factor in the accident and (they are) angry about that,” said Myeza.

Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the department was still awaiting details of the accident. 
The accident rounded up a tragic weekend for the provincial Department of Education, which lost three other pupils in separate incidents.
Two pupils from Fabeni Primary School were killed in an accident between Greytown and Keates on their way back from a school trip to Durban. 

Malwande Mavundla, 14, from Pro Nobis School in Dundee, collapsed while playing soccer on Friday and was taken to hospital, where he was certified dead.
The Mercury