Durban - “Siyaxolisa mfwethu (we apologise, brother), we didn’t know black people lived here or we wouldn’t have come here” and “if you were white we would have killed you”.
These were some of the chilling words and threats uttered by those who robbed a prominent Durban family during the early hours of Saturday.

Taweni Gondwe Xaba, the former editor of O magazine and current chief marketing officer of the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry, her businessman husband, Reggi Xaba, and their three young daughters were traumatised by the invasion of their Durban North home.
The robbery came a day after Statistics SA released the Victims of Crime Survey, which showed that home robberies had increased by 3% from the previous year.

The Xaba family had gone to bed on Friday, unaware of the trauma that was to come. 
“We moved here two months ago and we were feeling very safe, so much so that we were a bit lax with the security. We did not even arm the alarm,” Taweni said yesterday.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Taweni and her husband were awoken by the lights being switched on in their bedroom. 
At the time she thought it was probably one of her daughters, only to be confronted by the terrifying sight of three armed men in her bedroom.

She said the men made their intentions clear, telling the terrified couple that they were there to rob them, and would spare their lives only if they co-operated.
“They were asking how many people were in the house. We told them we live with children and that we have a live-in helper. They wanted the key to the helper’s cottage and we told them there is only one key and she locks from inside. They asked my husband for his gun and he told them that we don’t keep a gun. They asked for money and, once again, he told them we don’t keep any cash. They said if we find the money or the gun we will shoot you in the head with it,” she said.

The robbers then brought the eldest two of the three daughters - aged 12, 10 and 8 - into the room. The youngest was left in her room.
Using masking tape, the robbers tied Reggi’s hands and legs and taped his mouth.

Taweni and her two daughters were bound with the tape, but their mouths were not taped. At that moment Taweni said she had feared rape and even death.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Not knowing whether her daughter was safe in the other room, Taweni said she had prayed like never before. 

One of the men had sat in a chair to keep watch over the four family members while the others ransacked the house for valuables, including phones. Taweni’s iPhone was spared as the robbers feared it could be tracked. “They were really taking their time,” Taweni recalls.
Then they waited for the getaway car, whose driver kept getting lost. 

“They were giving him directions over the phone as you would give directions to a party. They came back to ask me the spelling of the name of the road,” she said.
After the robbers had left, Taweni managed to bite the tape off her hands and free the other family members.

She said her eldest daughter could not stop crying for about five hours, while the younger ones only started showing signs of trauma later.
Taweni said the incident has left her family traumatised. “I am angry because I work for what I have. My husband, a shoe manufacturer, works very hard and employs people. We are a family that has tried to contribute. I feel violated, it is very frustrating,” she said.

 bheki.mbanjwa@inl.co.za
The Mercury