Durban - Around 150 motorcycle riders from in and around Durban joined over 100 000 riders from 160 cities across the world in the “Distinguished Gentleman's Ride” to raise awareness about prostate cancer and men’s mental health in support of the Movember Foundation yesterday.
 Riders - dressed in a combination of suits, waistcoats, leather jackets and boots, bowties and ties - began the ride from The Beverly Hills Hotel in uMhlanga Rocks to The Cube in Innes Road Morningside before finishing off at the Northwood Crusaders Sports Club in Durban North. 

 About 150 motorcyclists joined over 100,000 riders worldwide in support of Moovember to raise awareness around prostate cancer and men's mental health. The Distinguished Gentleman's Ride started in umhlanga and finished in Durban North. pic.twitter.com/SmPUQgqmSd

 

John Aritho, General Manager of the Beverly Hills hotel and a member of the Durban Cafe Racers club said the worldwide movement is bringing awareness to men’s health, specifically prostate cancer, mental illness and suicide prevention which is a common problem around the world for men.

 “This movement is very special to me because I think we’ve all lost someone to cancer and especially men. It can be prevented, that's why we are trying to do this,” said Aritho.
 Aritho said $5.45 million (R77.3 million) was raised around the world in the months leading up to the ride.


 




 “The money is used for developing centers around the world in various countries. Centers that help with mental health, prostate cancer and helping prostate cancer victims,” he said.

 Roy Boyman, 76 - who is currently under treatment for prostate cancer said more men “need to realise the importance of having the necessary preventive care that needs to be taken to stop prostate cancer.”
 Janet Schoerie, one of the few women who attended the ‘Gentlemens’ ride said this is a very good cause because people tend to worry more about women’s cancer need to worry about men for a change.

 “Men are just as important,” she said.
 Shashi “Jester” Pillay from DOG Durban bikers club said: “Especially for guys, there’s not many causes that help promote prostate cancer and men's health, so we’ve got to take full opportunity were we can.”

 Tyson “Chaplain” McKeown also from DOG Durban bikers club said men think they can’t talk about these things and cant share problems especially if they are being bullied or if there’s some mental health issues.
 “We’re here to let men know that they can do that. Don’t be afraid, live proud,”said McKeown.

The Mercury