Durban - Justice Minister Michael Masutha has suspended KwaZulu-Natal regional court president Eric Nzimande who faces a litany of charges including allegations that he accepted payments in return for appointing attorneys as acting magistrates.
He also faces allegations of sexually harassing and demanding payments from a female attorney he appointed to serve as an acting magistrate.

The allegations against Nzimande were being probed by the Magistrates Commission, which then recommended to Masutha that Nzimande be provisionally suspended.
The suspension will be valid until the completion of an inquiry into Nzimande’s fitness to hold office. 

“The minister trusts that the inquiry by the Magistrates Commission against Mr Nzimande will be concluded as soon as possible. It is of the utmost importance that the magistracy and its leadership must be beyond reproach,” said Masutha’s spokesperson, Mukoni Rashitanga.
When contacted yesterday, Nzimande refused to comment, saying he has to respect the processes that are under way. 

“There are processes pending. Even if I wanted to comment I would first need to get permission from the commission.”
Rashitanga said some of the allegations against Nzimande were that on various occasions he approached the deputy minister of justice recommending that a number of attorneys be appointed to act in regional courts.

“It is alleged that in turn he had received numerous payments from these attorneys. It is also alleged that Mr Nzimande wrongfully victimised and/or sexually harassed a female acting regional magistrate.”
The Mercury understands from sources that one of the attorneys who allegedly made regular payments to Nzimande is a Pongola attorney who is said to be linked to a rhino-poaching syndicate. He, too, was appointed by Nzimande as an acting magistrate.

The attorney is also accused of facilitating payments to magistrates and prosecutors, in various parts of the province in a bid to influence cases. 
It is alleged that these payments were meant to influence the courts in favour of the accused, some of whom included poachers and alleged rapists.

Jamie Joseph, the director of Saving The Wild, who has been investigating a rhino poaching syndicate, said that Nzimande’s suspension was a monumental victory for the country’s natural heritage.
“What we are dealing with is a systematic web of corruption involving many magistrates and many lawyers, starting at the accused’s level, and it goes straight to the top. 

“It will take serious political will to ensure the Magistrates Commission and the police are supported in this ongoing investigation. I personally would like to see President Ramaphosa put his weight behind this,” she said.
Allan Thornton, the president of the US-based Environmental Investigation, said corruption was facilitating the rhino poaching crisis.

“It is imperative that corruption be eradicated from the judicial, law enforcement and conservation sectors to protect rhinos.” 
The allegations of sexual harassment against Nzimande were first made in an email to the justice minister by a former acting magistrate, who claimed that Nzimande had not only demanded money from her after she was appointed acting magistrate but that he had also demanded sexual favours.

Since 2012, when she had her first stint as acting magistrate, the magistrate had made payments totalling more than R140 000, sources said.
At one stage, she claims, Nzimande had made her sit on his lap and told her that she would never again be appointed acting magistrate if she refused his sexual advances.

The Mercury