Durban - Finance MEC Belinda Scott has secured an interim interdict against the controversial Amadelangokubona Business Forum and its mother body, the Federation for Radical Economic Transformation (FFRET), both of which she says show no regard for the rule of law.
The interdict was granted by the Pietermaritzburg High Court this week following an application by Scott seeking to prevent the groups from threatening or interfering with the work of treasury staff and intervention teams seconded to various provincial departments.

Last month, a group of about 40 members of FFRET stormed the Natalia building in Pietermaritzburg, the Department of Health’s provincial headquarters, and held senior managers hostage for more than two hours.
In her founding affidavit which forms part of the application, Scott revealed shocking details about the meeting and about the threats that treasury staff had received before that meeting.
The treasury team was deployed to the Department of Health following a decision by the provincial executive council on June 22 last year. Part of the reason for the team’s secondment was that the financial controls at the department had allegedly collapsed.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

An independent supply chain management (SCM) specialist Shamala Rajah was also appointed to the team as project manager.
Scott said in her affidavit that Rajah had as early as February 9 this year reported to treasury officials that she faced resistance and unco-operative SCM employees. Six days later, she found her car tyre slashed.
In May, Rajah received a threatening, anonymous phone call in which she was told: “Don’t show your face at treasury of health. We are watching you and your family.” Scott reported these threats and resistance to the premier in July. 

On September 6, about 40 people believed to belong to FFRET invaded the Natalia building and “hijacked” a meeting between the intervention team and the Health Department management.
The group first went into Scott’s office on the second floor where they “manhandled my receptionist, including attempting to steal her handbag”. 
The group had allegedly also tried to force their way through a glass door separating the reception and Scott’s office.

“During the commotion I felt terrified and threatened and was particularly concerned for my staff in that I was rendered helpless in my ability to protect their well-being and bodily integrity,” Scott said in the affidavit.
She added the “extent of the threat was so extreme” that her bodyguards insisted she be evacuated immediately. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
As the group made its way to the 11th floor, where the meeting between members of the intervention team and Health Department was being held, Scott instructed that the police be called.

Two police officers came and it became clear they were outnumbered. Scott made further calls to MEC Mxolisi Kaunda and Premier Willies Mchunu. More police were deployed.
She said the group stormed the boardroom where the meeting was being held, manhandled staff and screamed.
Scott accuses FFRET president Malusi Zondi of hurling racial insults, including referring to Rajah and Loraine Naidoo, the acting chief director for the provincial SCM unit, as “Indian dogs”.

Zondi said the federation would oppose Scott’s application as the matter was expected back in court on November 9. “We have appointed our legal representatives and we will get a chance to state our side of the story. We cannot stop members from fighting for what is rightfully theirs.”
 bheki.mbanjwa@inl.co.za
The Mercury