DURBAN - IT was a poignant moment for the father of the late soccer star Senzo Meyiwa, when South African Football Association officials visited his home ahead of the fourth anniversary of his son’s death anniversary on Friday.
Sam Meyiwa suffered a stroke in August leaving him speech-impaired and wheelchair-bound. But after the officials delivered a bountiful of promises, including preparations of the unveiling of Senzo’s tombstone at the Heroes Acre in Chesterville, outside Durban, he managed a smile.

One family member who did not want to be named said Safa’s visit last week restored Sam’s faith.
Meanwhile, the chairman of Senzo Robert Meyiwa Foundation, Ntokozo Sikhakhane, said he met the family to discuss preparations for the annual soccer tournament on behalf of Senzo.
“He has been a great role model to the youth. We want to follow in his footsteps by committing ourselves to helping the community. He was kind enough to donate his time and resources to kids and pensioners without seeking attention,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Safa spokesperson Dominic Chimhavi said that two delegates had met Meyiwa’s family to discuss various issues.
“We could have continued with our plan of honouring Senzo but we had to wait for police investigation to be concluded,” he said.
Premier Soccer League, Highlands Park Football Club coach Owen da Gama who introduced Meyiwa to top-flight football said he died when he was starting to take full control of his game.

“I do not work in the police forensic team, so I would not know why they are having difficulties in finding the killer,” Da Gama said.
Sibusiso Nxumalo, soccer fan said he was disappointed that four years later there has been no arrest.
“My faith was revived when Police Minister Bheki Cele was appointed but he has a mammoth task to solve the case. I don’t think this case will be resolved soon,” Nxumalo said.

Cele said the investigation was still ongoing. He asked people to remain patient until the investigation had been completed.