Durban - eThekwini Municipality mayor, Zandile Gumede, was honoured with the Dr Benjamin Barber Global Cities Award, at the Global Parliament of Mayors (GPM).
Gumede was acknowledged for her work in the community, her foundation that touch lives of the people. Also multiple programs and positions she has undertaken beyond her call of duty. The ceremony was held in Bristol in the United Kingdom. 

The city's acting head of communications, Mandla Nsele, said mostly in comparison is the impact as a woman mayor that she has brought not only in her local work but to the global community. 
"Durban, is fast becoming a known city for its drastic foot forward in providing practical urban solutions to achieve the 2030 urban agenda and most importantly, the transformation of the lives of the people of Durban," he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“I am excited and emotional about getting this recognition, especially on the day we were celebrating Mama Albertina Sisulu. I dedicate this award to the youth and other women leaders of the world who are the forefront of service delivery,” Gumede said. 

She said it was an honour as receiving the award meant that Durban was on the right track in resolving challenges faced by modern cities.
"We are extremely happy to receive this award because it attests to the good work we are doing as a cosmopolitan city to meet the needs of those residing in our city. These include our people coming from different parts of the country and those who have left their countries for various reasons and made Durban their home,” Gumede said. 
The international award was established to commemorate outstanding action or research on urban governance, contribution to advancing the values and principles set by the Global Parliament of Mayors. 

Recently, the eThekwini bagged four awards at World Travel Awards held at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Convention Centre. Last weekend, we also received two awards at the Kamoso Awards for implementing EPWP program at the function held at Tropica Hotel in Durban hosted by Provincial department of Public Works. 
The Mercury