Durban - E-Toll tow truck driver rescued a mother and daughter who broke down in the middle of the N1 highway after they escaped being rear ended by a truck and several cars at the weekend.
 Katherine Stott, who was on her way to a wedding, burst into tears when an e-Toll tow truck driver named Godfrey stopped to help her.    “It was harrowing watching through my rear-view mirror as a 16-wheeler truck filled my back window, only to swerve away from hitting me within milliseconds. 

“Watching 15 cars pile up behind me at random angles as they swerved to miss one another and ultimately prevent themselves from crashing into me. How we didn't get hit was beyond me and an absolute miracle,” said Stott.
The mother of three said it was a crazy experience with fellow motorists hooting and flashing lights at her.
“You cannot believe the craziness of being stationery on a highway that is flowing at 120km an hour,” she said.

Having already called her insurance company to send a tow truck, Stott was waiting in her car with her daughter when Godfrey stopped his tow truck behind her and came to her window.
 She said her initial reaction was that she couldn't pay him and Discovery was on their way.
 “He says to me: "I don't want your money. I don't want anything from you. All I want is for you to be safe. Someone is going to bump you... you are not safe here,”’ said Stott.

He started by directing traffic away from my car said Stott as he placed beacons in the lane behind and around her.
“He drove his truck to the front and then came and took my daughter by the hand and escorted her to the safety of his vehicle.

 

“He got me to put my car in neutral and remove the handbrake so that he could hitch it up and pull it onto the flatbed. He then came and personally escorted me to the cab of his truck and finished pulling my car up,”  Stott said.
Godfrey took Stott to the closest eToll gantry where there was a wide concrete section to park and off loaded her car from his flatbed.
 “I told him that he is an incredible human being and that the world needs more people like him and that I would be eternally grateful for his help and kindness,”said Stott.

The driver waited until Discovery Insure arrived then drove off.
“Just as quickly as he had appeared, he was gone, but I will never forget his kindness,”she said.
Stott’s story was shared on KZN Traffics Facebook page on 22 October and has received  1400 comments and 4,298 Shares.


The Mercury