Durban - While mourning the death of his mother, who was buried just last week, Warrant Officer Bhekisigcino Zethembe Khwela was gunned down outside his home in front of his son in KwaNdengezi on Tuesday.
SAPS spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said the 54-year-old Mariannhill detective was talking to his son and a friend after 7pm last night, when two men approached them on foot.

“The men fired several shots at them and the detective was killed instantly after he was shot multiple times, his son was wounded and the friend escaped unscathed,” said Naidoo.
Khwela’s brother, Wiseman, said his brother did not tell him of any enemies or threats against his life.
“My brother got shot with 22 bullets, I didn’t think that he could be killed in this way,” he said.

Khwela leaves behind a wife who is a sergeant at SAPS Pinetown, three daughters aged 5, 13 and 16, as well as a son who is in his late twenties.
Wiseman said his brother was a fair man, a friend to everybody and a man that liked the truth.
“I spoke to him last night and 10 minutes later I received a phone call that he had been killed. It took me three minutes to go to his house because we live close to each other and I found him laying down, dead,” he said.

Wiseman added that the bullet that hit his nephew went straight through his thigh and he is recovering.
In a separate incident, Captain Lumkile Tyibilika was killed during the early hours of Tuesday morning, in New Brighton in the Eastern Cape.
National Commissioner of Police, General Khehla John Sitole has condemned the killing of police officers.

“The killing of our two colleagues yesterday reflects what police must endure daily. I have instructed the provincial commissioners of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal to mobilise maximum resources to track down those responsible and bring them to book,” added Sitole.
Sitole said the motives for both incidents were not known at this stage. 
In both incidents the 72 hour Activation Plan, which mobilises critical resources, was being implemented.