Durban - Two uMfolozi sugar cane farmers have lost their lengthy legal battle to get the iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority to breach a river mouth to stop the flooding of their properties.
Their case was dismissed by the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) this week.

The two farmers, Paul van Rooyen and Petros Maphumulo, who are shareholders of uMfolozi Sugar Planters, approached the high court in 2015 when rainfalls caused a rise in the Mfolozi river levels, resulting in the back-flooding of their farms.
At the time, the parties agreed that the iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority would breach the Mfolozi river mouth to the sea to drain back flooding on the applicants’ farmland.

However, Van Rooyen and Maphumulo brought two further applications in December 2015 and March 2016 alleging that iSimangaliso was in contempt of the order granted in October 2015. 
When the matter was finally argued, the farmers wanted the court to order iSimangaliso to act on a management strategy they had drafted in 2010. The management strategy focused on restoring the ecological functioning of the St Lucia system by allowing fresh water to continue to flow from the Mfolozi River, for the Mfolozi and St Lucia mouths to combine and the system to operate naturally. 

The management strategy, which was based on scientific research, recognised that back-flooding of some of the low-lying sugar cane farms might occur as a consequence of not artificially breaching the mouth, but this was unavoidable as those farms were situated within the estuarine functional area. 
The research also found that permanently opening or artificially breaching the river mouth was having “devastating” effects on the biodiversity of the Lake St Lucia system and the iSimangaliso Wetland Park as a whole.

But the farmers’ case was dismissed by the high court, which found that iSimangaliso’s actions were grounded in and sanctioned by law.
On appeal, the SCA found that the farmers adopted a “scatter-gun approach” to the litigation by claiming that iSimangaliso was acting arbitrarily and without any lawful basis.

“That wide-ranging attack was met with a detailed analysis of the applicable laws guiding the actions of iSimangaliso, which were extensively described in the answering affidavits,” it said.
A further stumbling block was that last January, iSimangaliso submitted to the minister a final Integrated Management Plan, which includes the Estuarine Management Plan for the St Lucia Estuary for the period 2017-2021.

This meant the relief sought by the farmers was moot as they wanted action on a management plan that was no longer in effect. But the farmers argued that the court could at least order that iSimangaliso be cognisant of back-flooding when making “environmental decisions”.
However, the SCA ruled it could not make this order as it could not rule on “hypothetical, abstract or academic issues”.

The court added that the farmers based their relief on an alleged historic obligation by iSimangaliso to drain down back-flooding of farms but this had been overtaken by the passage of time and administrative decisions.
The Mercury