Durban - The state will study forensic reports to establish which board members of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have stolen public money, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan said in Durban.
He was a keynote speaker at the Durban Girls’ College Founders’ Day event on Monday nightHe said at one SOE which he did not name, he had discovered a forensic report that had not been acted upon.

Gordhan said the report revealed that some of the directors of the old board had been engaged in corruption.
“We will look at the forensic report and find out who took how much, which is a very polite way of saying who stole how much.
“We have to see how we recover the funds that have been taken because those are your funds, and we are going to require those people to pay back the money,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Gordhan said President Cyril Ramaphosa had shown that he had a different vision from his predecessor Jacob Zuma, although he did not mention Zuma by name.
He said Ramaphosa was a president who had clear ideas about the type of young people “we have to grow and develop in our society to overcome the bad elements in our society over the last six or seven years”.
“In the first instance, we have to discover what the truth is in what we call state capture, and we have to understand this phenomenon.

“The Zondo Commission of Inquiry is beginning to show us that,” he said.
Gordhan said the government has a responsibility to stabilise state entities financially “as after seven or 10 years of malfeasance, there is a level of financial instability in many of these institutions”. 
“In the third week of this month, we have to all scramble around for some of these entities to raise R100million in order for workers in these entities to be paid salaries, and to ensure that operations get off the ground.

“The aim is to reposition them so that they actually make a contribution to our economy by doing the core business that they are supposed to do,” he said, adding that the government would also make sure that the entities have the right level of accountability, transparency and required performance.
The MercuryAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads