Durban - The IFP has again postponed its provincial elective conference but insists that the conference to elect new leadership will take place before next year’s general elections.
Last year the party nominated Velenkosini Hlabisa, as IFP leader Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi’s successor but with no date set for the elective conference, Hlabisa will have to wait to take over the reins. The party’s deputy national chairperson and head of the Daily Management Committee, Albert Mncwango, yesterday said audits of 1500 branches had been completed, but problems persisted at constituency and district level.

“Last week Monday several branches and structures advised the National Executive Committee that certain constitutional prescripts had been compromised in the preparatory stages for the conference.
“On analysis and on the basis of advice, the NEC found these concerns to be legitimate, further compounding the prospects of a successful conference.”
Questioned about the ability of the party to hold its elective conference before next year’s elections, he said they had put in place an action programme to deal with the issues and for outstanding processes to be resolved before the general elections. “The elective conference involves the nomination of candidates and we realised we are not ready for this conference.” He also addressed suggestions that Hlabisa was not well liked in some quarters of the party and it was this scenario that was delaying the elective conference.

“We are not aware of any challenges to Hlabisa being the leading candidate for leader of the party at the elective conference. The National Council and extended National Council voted unanimously for Hlabisa. We still have one candidate for the party presidency.
“IFP members are unanimous that he is the right person but this still has to be confirmed at an elective conference,” Mncwango said.
Hlabisa was nominated after Buthelezi announced late last year that he would be stepping down as party leader.

Mkhuleko Hlengwa, the party’s national spokesperson said the party wanted to hold its elective conference, but was “duty bound to protect the integrity of our processes and the legitimacy of our conference outcomes".
“It would be irregular and inconsistent with our constitution to hold a conference for the sake of holding a conference. We wish to state for the record that this was a unanimous NEC decision, ratified by the Extended National Council."
 kuben.chetty@inl.co.za

The Mercury