Durban - On Friday, Police Minister, Bheki Cele, is expected to address the media on the developments of serious crime in Durban. He along with the National Commissioner of Police General Khehla John Sitole and the National Head of the Hawks Lieutenant General Godfrey Lebeya will host an urgent press briefing this afternoon. 
Cele’s visit comes just a day after Butcher Road residents had to duck for cover after a brazen drive-by took place before 6pm. 

Speaking on the basis of anonymity, a resident said she came home to find bullet shells in her yard and on the pavement outside. 
Related ArticlesSydenham Heights shootings: Police should have acted soonerWATCH: Bullets fly as drug turf war rocks Sydenham communityVIDEO: Stray bullet hits motorist windscreen during Sydenham drug turf warSydenham Heights shootings: Police should have acted soonerWATCH: Bullets fly as drug turf war rocks Sydenham communityVIDEO: Stray bullet hits motorist windscreen during Sydenham drug turf warSydenham Heights shootings: Police should have acted sooner12“I am not sure if they were shooting at the boys sitting outside on the road. I did not get a good look at the car. I just noticed a white car driving passed and then heard gunshots. Fortunately, no one was hurt,” she said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The woman said she was frustrated because her children were not even safe in their own yards.
It is believed that the shooting is related to the ongoing gun battles at Sydenham Heights nearby, which has left residents living in fear. 

Recently, Sydenham Heights residents had to duck for cover as armed gangs fired at each other. 
The shootouts are alleged to be taking place between rival gangs living at Sydenham Heights. 

Last month, police responded to a shooting in Sydenham. At the time, the Daily News reported that police were caught in the crossfire between two rival drug gangs.
The article said police responded to a call about the shooting and upon arrival suspects opened fire at the members before fleeing the scene. No injuries were sustained by the police. No arrests were made. A car driving by was struck by a stray bullet. The driver, fortunately, was not injured. 

Daily News