Durban - The bail application for the 11 men accused of planting and detonating a series of bombs in Durban was postponed yesterday after the State handed in a 12-page supporting affidavit at the last minute.
The affidavit included two annexures that contained screen-grabs of text messages from a person named Ahmad Afriqi, who condemned the Shia Muslims and called for someone to “cut the throat” of a Shia sympathiser.

Shia is a branch of Islam which believes that the Islamic prophet Muhammad designated Ali Abi Talib as his successor and the Imam (leader) after him.
This view primarily contrasts with that of Sunni Islam, whose adherents believe that Muhammad did not appoint a successor and consider Abu Bakr, who they claim was appointed through a community consensus in Saqifa, to be the first rightful successor after the prophet.
In the supporting affidavit, one of the messages from Afriqi read, “Anyone who maintains a relationship with a Shia is not to be trusted.”

The suspects’ legal teams were meant to submit their replying affidavits in their bail applications.
However, when state prosecutor Adele Barnard handed in the supporting affidavit, magistrate Irfaan Khalil said the teams needed to amend their replying affidavits.
Defence advocates Jimmy Howse, Niven Rai and Cindy Naidu said although they “reluctantly” accepted the supporting affidavit, they would file their replying affidavits next week.

Farhad Hoomer Ahmed Haffejee Thabit Mwenda Mohamad Akbar Seiph Mohamed Amani Mayani Abubakar Ali Abbas Jooma Mahammed Sobruin Ndikumana Shabani and Iddy Omani have been remanded in custody.
Goolam Haffejee a cousin of Ahmed’s was released on R100 000 bail last week.
The case was remanded to next Tuesday, when arguments will be heard on the accused’s bail applications.

Meanwhile, shocking details of how a Durban property owned by a wealthy businessman was allegedly used as a training facility for Islamic State (IS) supporters were revealed in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court this week. The house is situated in Reservoir Hills.

 


The court also heard that the suspects were guided by an IS handbook on how to build bombs and take part in violent acts against non-Muslims.
 kailene.pillay@inl.co.za

The Mercury