Durban - The Kloof and Highway SPCA has said that the 13th positive rabies result has been confirmed.
Brigitte Ferguson of Marketing and Fundraising at Kloof and Highway SPCA, said on Monday a cross breed puppy, at least 12 weeks old, was brought into the SPCA. Immediately reception staff noticed that something was wrong with the puppy and when it was examined the puppy was observed to have neurological issues and was extremely vocal. The decision was immediately made to humanely euthanise the puppy and it was sent to the state vet for rabies testing.

“Once the test was conducted, a positive rabies result was confirmed. This is the 13th positive rabies result this year at the Kloof and Highway SPCA. This puppy was suffering and could have infected other animals and people with the rabies virus, we are so grateful to the lady and her son who rushed the puppy to our SPCA and save it from further suffering,” Ferguson said.
After the result, the member of the public who brought the puppy in was immediately contacted and was told about the seriousness of the situation. She then confirmed that five other people had handled the puppy.

“The Kloof and Highway SPCA are urging members of public to make sure their pets are vaccinated against rabies as well as exercise caution when approaching stray animals. If you find a stray animal you are not familiar with only approach if it is safe to do so and absolutely necessary. In the event of being bitten or scratched immediately wash the area very well and flush under running water and immediately seek medical attention. If you are bitten or scratched by and animal with no proof of vaccination you will be required to go for a costly course of rabies vaccinations treatment. rabies is fatal and the threat of it should not be taken lightly. We strongly advise against keeping any stray animals with the rising threat of rabies,” she said.
World Rabies Day was recently celebrated on September 28, to raise awareness and strengthen the commitment to strategic interventions for the elimination of human rabies in endemic countries by the year 2030, said the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD).

“In South Africa, a total of 13 human rabies cases have been confirmed in 2018 and to date, of which seven cases were from KwaZulu-Natal Province and six from the Eastern Cape Province. Two additional cases from Eastern Cape could not be confirmed through laboratory testing, but are considered probable cases.  This represents the highest number of cases reported in South Africa in the past ten years. The rise in the number of human rabies cases is associated with the outbreak of rabies in dogs in the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape Provinces,” the NICD said in a statement.
Daily News