Durban - Stroke is a leading cause of death and disability in South Africa, and it is critical for people to have greater awareness of the condition and its signs and symptoms, so that a victim of a stroke can be treated promptly and at an appropriate stroke care facility.
This is according to clinical improvement lead at Netcare, Dr Biancha Mentoor.

National Stroke Week takes place between October 29 and November 3 and creates an awareness about strokes and how they can be successfully treated. 
“Studies have shown that if a person who has had a stroke receives timeous treatment at a hospital or stroke facility that is trained in, and appropriately equipped to, handle this complex condition which requires specialised treatment, then the risk of mortality and long-term disability can be substantially reduced, ” Mentoor said. 
She said if this can be achieved, the damage caused to the brain can often be minimised, and lives can be saved.

Mentoor said South Africans should be aware that the adoption of healthier lifestyle choices can assist in reducing the risk of an individual suffering a stroke,” she added.
According to the World Stroke Campaign, the organisers of World Stroke Day, this potentially dangerous medical condition results in the deaths of some six million people every year and is the leading cause of permanent disability globally. 
The South African Stroke Society (SASS) meanwhile observes that strokes are also a leading cause of death and disability in South Africa.

Dr Mentoor said that some of the Netcare Group’s Medicross medical and dental centres and Akeso psychiatric hospitals will be undertaking special awareness and educational drives to educate  South Africans on the causes and warning signs of strokes, as well as on possible ways of reducing their risk of developing this condition.
Medical emergency
Dr Patty Francis, one of three neurologists who treat patients who have had a stroke at Netcare uMhlanga Hospital in Durban, said that a stroke should be considered a medical emergency and can potentially occur in anyone at any age. She points out that this condition often not only impacts those who have suffered a stroke, but also on families, workplaces and communities.

Stroke symptoms
• Numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg, especially on one side of the body
• Confusion, trouble speaking or understanding

• Trouble seeing with one or both eyes
• Trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination
• Severe headache with no known cause.

She explained that a stroke occurs when a clot or a rupture in a blood vessel disrupts the blood supply to a part of the brain. The affected area of the brain becomes starved of blood and oxygen, causing brain cells to die. 
“A stroke can cause damage to the functioning of the brain, which may result in disability and even be fatal. Many people are disabled to the extent that they are no longer able to care for themselves and may also require long-term rehabilitation,” she said. 
Types of strokes

There are two main types of strokes: haemorrhagic and ischaemic strokes. The former is caused by a haemorrhage in the blood vessels of the brain while the latter results from a disruption in the supply of blood to the brain as a result of a thrombus (blood clot) or embolism.
“The effects of a stroke can vary greatly and will depend upon the area of the brain that was affected and the degree to which it was damaged. Some individuals may be severely affected, suffering physical and mental impairment while others may recover fully," Francis said. 
Individuals who are over the age of 55 are at greater risk of stroke. Other risk factors include high blood pressure, diabetes, male gender, family history of stroke, high cholesterol levels, smoking and an unhealthy lifestyle. Younger people may be at risk of stroke too, particularly some at-risk women on the contraceptive pill and individuals using certain recreational drugs. 

By addressing these risk factors everyone can take positive action to reduce their risk of suffering a stroke.
Daily News