Durban - Pietermaritzburg businessman Rajivee Soni, who was sentenced to an effective 30-year term of imprisonment for the murder of his former best friend, Dr Bhavish Sewram, intends to apply for leave to appeal against his conviction and sentence.
The Pietermaritzburg High Court was packed with friends and family of both Soni and Sewram, however, Soni’s ex-wife, who was the centre of the revenge-saga, did not attend the proceedings. 

Sewram was shot dead outside his surgery in May 2013, by people Soni hired. 
The murder was the final hit on the doctor, after a series of revenge attacks that lasted for over a year. Soni began his string of attacks after he found his wife, Kerusha, having an affair with Sewram. 
Sewram’s elderly father, Parmanand, said he was disappointed that Soni did not get life. 

“The loss of a child through a despicable deed is a loss that can never be overcome,” he said. He also thanked his friends and family, and the community, for their support since the murder and throughout the court case. 
Judge Jacqueline Henriques had harsh words for Soni, whose defence was that his young children and elderly mother would suffer from his incarceration. 
“One must not forget that the accused embarked on attacks over a long period of time. He was persistent in seeking revenge These were not crimes of passion. He had sufficient time to consider his conduct and the consequences for his children and mother, who are dependant on him.

“This was a cold-blooded killing, with no care for the sanctity of life,” she said. 
Judge Hendriques considered in Soni’s favour that he was a first time offender, relatively young, at 42, and was once an asset to the community. 
She also recommended that Correctional Services take note of a request that his two children have contact with him. 

While Judge Hendriques read out the sentence, Soni remained stony-faced except when she spoke of the bond between his daughter and him, Soni cried in the dock. 
After the sentencing, Sewram’s wife Yuvadia said that it was “very sad that his family and innocent children had to suffer the consequences of his evil actions”. 
Soni’s application for leave to appeal has been provisionally set down for November 21.

The Mercury