Durban - The ANC has described its victory in the Chatsworth ward 71 by-election as a foretaste of what is to come in 2019.
However, political analysts believe this is over-stretching it. 

The ANC had fielded Previn Vedan, a 26-year-old lawyer, as a candidate and this paid off as he was voted for by 2793 voters (45.7%) compared with 2325 voters (41.96%) who chose the DA’s Fatima Ismail.
The ANC, which has been battling dwindling support among Indian voters, said the victory showed it was reclaiming support among minorities. 

ANC spokesperson Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu said it was an indication the ANC “has a traditional and long-lasting relationship” with Indian voters.
“People of Indian origin do have hope in the ANC and do trust that the ANC represents the interest of all of us in this country,” she said. 

Of the six voting districts in the ward, the ANC won two. However, those were the biggest. The first was Bottlebrush Community Hall where Vedan won 1634 (79.6%) votes while Ismail got 242 (11%) votes. Vedan also won the Shallcross district. Ismail got 323 votes (47.7%) compared with Vedan’s 510 votes (49%) in Shallcross. 
Political analyst Protas Madlala said it was too early to tell whether minorities were warming to the ANC or not.

“One swallow does not make a summer and we cannot talk of trends based on one ward. We need more to be able to draw conclusions. Also, there are many factors that could have been at play. It may have been that the candidate of the ANC was more popular than the others, although people tend to vote for parties,” he said.
Another analyst, Imraan Buccus, said in terms of the 2019 elections, not much could be read from one ward. The swing to the ANC from the DA was, however, a signal of more than just a voting shift. 

“There are signs that Indian youth are finding the kind of voice that was evident in 1970s Black Consciousness and the mass democratic movement of the 1980s and this bodes well for inter-racial and class relationships in that ward. Young leaders are asserting a new spirit that we see evident in Previn and this new spirit will add to the building blocks of our social cohesion project,” Buccus said.
Speaking during a press briefing yesterday Vedan said: “We have a lot of positivity, a lot of unity, there is a lot of renewal in our people. We have been visiting the different areas and no matter where we go people are warm to us. It was a campaign of unity”. 

DA leader in KwaZulu-Natal, Zwakele Mncwango conceded defeat, saying it called for introspection from the DA. “We have to sit down and do an introspection on how we lost the ward. It is a wake-up call to say we must find out what went wrong”.
The Mercury