Durban - To better serve the Shallcross community in Chatsworth and keep its residents safe, an Operations Control Centre (OCC) was opened on Saturday.
eThekwini deputy mayor Fawzia Peer and SAPS acting cluster commander Major-General Mandlenkosi Chirwa officially opened the OCC.

The concept for the centre was the brainchild of the Shallcross sector crime forum chairperson, Mahendra Lillikant. 
Lillikant thanked the sponsors, street watch groups, security companies, SAPS and metro police for sharing in the forum’s vision and seeing their dedication and commitment to the project.
“Together with our partners, we intend to create more visibility, thereby creating a safer area for all those who live in it, as well as for all those who pass through it,” he said.


Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said Chirwa welcomed this initiative, which aligns itself with the Community Policing Strategy launched by the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele.
“The OCC will serve as a centre where voluntary street patrollers will be based, with the hope of having it manned on a 24-hour basis,” said Zwane.

Registered on the Namola app - where people can request emergency assistance - the team are dispatched to any emergency calls placed in the area.
“We have a team of eight dedicated guys, but we also get assistance from the street watches in the area and off-duty police officers,” said Lillikant.

 

He said the volunteers sacrifice their time and resources, including their private vehicles and petrol, to assist the community.
“We are out seven nights a week protecting the community and still have to go to our day jobs in the morning,” he said.
He said the vision for the future was to partner with disaster management and emergency services to ensure prompt aid and rapid response.

“Earlier this month we responded to a business robbery and rendered first aid to the guards who were shot and stabbed. Both of them survived,” he said.
DA MP Sharon Hoosen, who attended the launch, said the OCC should serve as a deterrent to criminals operating in the area.
The Mercury