Durban - Less than two weeks after alleging that she had received death threats, the municipal manager of Richmond has been suspended from her duties as tensions between her and its political leadership continue.
Bongiwe Mnikathi was suspended on Monday following a full council meeting which took the decision after accusing her of showing disregard for the council.

Speaker of the municipality, Samora Ndlovu confirmed the suspension but would not delve into details, referring questions to the municipal spokesperson.
Sibonelo Bhengu, the spokesperson for the municipality, said one of the charges stems from Mnikathi’s alleged absconding from a council meeting.

He said the council had followed all proper procedures, including giving Mnikathi seven days to state why she should not be suspended. “She never responded to that letter.” 
Although she was at work, Mnikathi did not attend the meeting which suspended her, Bhengu said.

Contacted yesterday, Mnikathi said the move to suspend her is in contravention of an existing court order. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“All I can say is that no one is above the law. There is a court order and we are due back in court at the end of the month. I do not know what the rush is all about,” she said.

Mnikathi was referring to a court order which set aside an earlier attempt to suspend her in July. She had approached the court asking it to set aside the decision of the council which had been based on other charges against her. 
Mnikathi dismissed allegations that she absconded from a council meeting, saying she was never informed or consulted about Monday’s meeting.

She said while the council had written to her giving her seven days to respond, this period had not lapsed.
But Bhengu said while it is true that there is a court order, the recent suspension is based on new transgressions and was not related to the July suspension.

Bhengu said an acting municipal manager, Bigboy Mhlongo, has been appointed and will be introduced to staff today. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Last month, Mnikathi opened a case at the Alexander Police Station in Pietermaritzburg after allegedly receiving death threats via an SMS.

The Mercury