Durban - Residents of eThekwini have been urged to intensify their water-saving measures following revelations that supply and demand are tight.
Speaking at the Umgeni Water briefing in Durban yesterday, the water utility's chief executive, Thamsanqa Hlongwa, said the situation could worsen in the event of a drought or lack of rain.

“Normally we would prefer that the supply is higher than the demand, but the situation is much different. The supply and demand are equal, and if there is interruption in the supply, or worse, drought, we could face a crisis.”
The data for dams levels showed that the two big dams responsible for the supply of water in eThekwini were above 50%, with Midmar at 95.26% and Hazelmere at 61.45%. 
Hlongwa said long-term plans to build a desalination plant to address the city's water shortages had stalled because of the astronomical cost.

Umgeni officials said yesterday that construction would only go ahead on a pilot project in Elysium, at Mthwa- lume on the South Coast, if money became available. 
Hlongwa said although desalination was the future, the cost was prohibitive. He said it could cost R500million to build a desalination plant that produced 10 megalitres of water a day.
“One of the challenges is the topography of our province. Most areas are hundreds of metres above sea level, which means that we have to pump water from the plant to the areas and that will cost more.

“We have an ocean that is unlike that of other countries. The salt content is different and great care is needed with the process of desalination or it could create a health hazard - which would add to the cost,” said Hlongwa. 
He said the ideal situation would be to develop a desalination plant for factories near the sea, where water need not be pumped up.
Hlongwa also raised concerns about the delays in the Umkomazi water project in Bulwer that has been stalled by environmentalists who object to the construction of water infrastructure near the Umkomazi River. 

The project requires the construction of a 34km tunnel from the Umkomazi River to Richmond and to Umlaas Road. It will supply large parts of Durban.
 thami.magubane@inl.co.za
The Mercury