Durban - The condition of the Howick man who was left fighting for his life in a Vietnamese hospital after a scooter accident has improved so much that he was moved out of the intensive care unit yesterday.
Brad Purchase, 28, who has been teaching English in Hanoi, Vietnam, since March, crashed into a light pole while driving his scooter last week. 

He suffered a broken jaw and some broken ribs, with one of the ribs broken in three places. 
He also suffered a lesion on his left lung and was in a coma for days.
His family launched a facebook funding campaign on Backabuddy to pay his escalating hospital bills. They have since collected R235000, which has covered most of his medical costs.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Related ArticlesFundraising project started for SA man injured in Vietnam
His mother, Kathryn, and sister Shannon are in Vietnam caring for Purchase. 
Speaking to The Mercury from Vietnam, Shannon said her brother was now fully conscious but doctors had stressed that the injuries were physically traumatic. 
His sister said his short-term memory and eyesight had been compromised since he awoke from his coma. 

“To cut costs, Brad was moved to a 24-hour care facility as he still needs 100% assistance. He is very tired and in a lot of pain, but we notice small improvements every day,” Shannon said. 
She said he still needed to go for further CT scans before returning to South Africa. When he gets home, he will need to see various specialists. 
“It is going to be a long road to recovery and we still need all the help we can get. Our Backabuddy campaign is still up and running and we’re hoping for an influx of finances to get Brad through the next steps in his recovery progress,” she said.

Vietnamese doctors have since operated on Purchase’s jaw, removing dozens of 2mm bone fragments in the process. 
Doctors also drained his damaged lung. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Shannon said the family had been overwhelmed by the love and support they had received since the accident.

“Thanks to everyone who has been sharing and contributing to Brad’s Backabuddy campaign,” Shannon said. 
 kailene.pillay@inl.co.za
The Mercury