Durban - Residents have applauded the work of a small group of people whose quick action yesterday, possibly saved the life of a young dolphin. 
The mammal was spotted battling through the rough wind and sea conditions at uMhlanga’s main beach by Kit and Elaine Case from Casea Charters, Umhlanga Rocks Surf Lifesaving Club (URSLC), NSRI and Ushaka Marine World.  

 Senior lifesaving club member Derek Morris, according to Northglen News, spotted the dolphin which was trapped on the rocks first.
 “Derek (Morris) spotted the dolphin struggling to the right of Grannies Pool. When we got out to him he had a few cuts on his head and it was far too rocky to try and gain any footing to help the dolphin,” explained URSLC member Declan Bradfield.

 Rescuers moved the dolphin to Grannies Pool and supported his head to keep the blowhole at the surface.





 Sharon Van Straaten, founder of Pink Phoenix Cancer Foundation, who posted the video on Facebook said members of URSLC rallied in support as they gathered around the dolphin in Grannies Pool, holding it up and porpoising it’s tall to help it recover.
 “Just beautiful to see our community so invested in our magnificent wildlife we have here along our coast,” said Van Straaten.


 A pod of dolphins which the struggling dolphin belonged to waited near the scene during the three hour rescue mission.

 Van Straaten posted a “huge” thank you on Facebook this morning to Kit and Elaine Case from Casea Charters who along with other rescuers played a big role in the rescue of the dolphin.
 “While Elaine was actively involved in the water to resuscitate the Dolphin, Kit fetched his rubber duck to assist in releasing the Dolphin back at sea.

 “The ocean conditions were treacherous on Sunday but Kit, one of the most experienced skippers, took the responsibility of launching through the rough surf to aid the Dolphin,”said Van Straaten.
 

Rescuers dove into the water to help the dolphin acclimatise  before he swam off moments later to meet the patiently waiting pod of dolphins. 
The Mercury