Durban - The municipal manager of Richmond Municipality, who took the hot seat after her predecessor was gunned down in broad daylight, fears for her life after receiving death threats.
On Friday, Bongiwe Mnikathi opened a case at the Alexander police station in Pietermaritzburg after receiving a text message which, among other things, said she would suffer the same fate as that of her predecessor, Sbu Sithole.

Mnikathi said she was taking the allegations seriously and had increased her security detail, although she would not divulge details. 
“I am concerned. In fact, I am scared. There is no way you cannot be scared when the person before you was killed in broad daylight,” she said.

The number from which the text was sent was on voicemail yesterday. 
The speaker of the council, Samora Ndlovu, said he was not aware of the alleged death threats against the official. 

“We have not been informed. It is the first time I am hearing of this. I believe the municipality should have been informed because it is the employer.”
Since taking over in August last year, Mnikathi has had a tough tenure, characterised by numerous protests and moves to try to oust her.

The municipality still intends to lay 22 charges against Mnikathi. The charges, which relate to various alleged transgressions, include the unlawful termination of contracts. 
This was confirmed by Sbonelo Bhengu, spokesperson at the municipality, who said the process would start today.

However, Mnikathi’s lawyers have written to the municipality reminding it that any action against Mnikathi will be in contravention of a high court interdict.
Mnikathi secured an interim interdict after the council tried to suspend her from the position. The matter is back in court later this month.

Last week, a group of employees blocked the gates to the municipality, demanding that Mnikathi vacate her position. 
The threats against Mnikathi come a week after Premier Willies Mchunu released a commission of inquiry report into political killings in the province.

Sbu Sithole’s widow, who testified at the commission, said she believed her late husband’s murder had been political. 
No arrests have been made in the murder case.

The Mercury