Durban - The Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (the Hawks) has confirmed that 19 men, arrested for bomb threats across the city, face charges of murder, attempted murder, extortion, money laundering and arson. 
A total of 19 men appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court today but Magistrate Irfaan Khalil ruled that the media and relatives of the accused were not allowed to sit in during court proceedings. 

Meanwhile, a man was found at one of the properties that were raided by police. 


 




The matter has been remanded to tomorrow.


Background
By late last night, police had arrested the suspects who are believed to be part of a larger syndicate responsible for planting explosive devices at a Verulam mosque and several Woolworths stores in Durban since May.

The syndicate planned to terrorise businesses in the Durban area by planting incendiary devices to create panic among consumers. Their plan was to threaten more businesses in KwaZulu-Natal in a bid to extort money.
Hawks spokesperson, Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi, confirmed that the suspects were also linked to the attack at the Imam Hussein Mosque in Verulam, which left one person dead.

Police discovered the first incendiary device (which detonated) at the mosque a few weeks after the attack.
After months of investigation and crime intelligence driven operations, police said the motive for the attacks appeared to be extortion and not terror attacks.

It is believed that due to ongoing investigations, officials did not want to jeopardise the case by revealing the suspects’ identities at the first court appearance.


 




“All these cases, including the mosque attack, are linked to extortion. It is unfortunate someone lost their life in the attack. He was just in the wrong place at the wrong time,” national police spokesperson, Brigadier Vish Naidoo, said. 
Both Naidoo and Mulaudzi said the police had not gone to the extent of investigating terrorism in any of the cases.

The arrests come after five months of investigations into numerous bomb scares in the city.
After the first incendiary device was found under a pulpit at the Verulam mosque, several more were found - some even detonated - at Woolworths stores in and around Durban. Two more devices were subsequently found in Morningside, outside the Greyville Racecourse.

On Friday, police arrested the first three suspects, believed to be the syndicate kingpins.
Over the weekend, members of the Hawks, the National Intervention Unit and the bomb squad raided three properties in Reservoir Hills and Parlock.

The Mercury