Durban - The national Department of Health has hit back at claims that there is a shortage of stock of second- and third-line antiretrovirals (ARVs) across the country.
Advocacy group Stop Stock-outs Project (SSP) made the claim and has lambasted the Department of Health for not taking the matter seriously. 

However, Ministry of Health spokesperson, Popo Maja, said they had not received any communication about a shortage of ARVs from SSP.
SSP issued a statement saying the department had not given a clear plan about how it would address the shortages. 
According to SSP’s acting manager, Lauren Jankelowitz, there have been shortages in KwaZulu-Natal, North West, Limpopo, Gauteng, the Eastern Cape and Free State, with the North West being the worst affected. She said no reports had been received from the Northern Cape.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“Responsibility for this monumental crisis lies at the door of the affected provincial and national departments of health. 
“The SSP hotline has been inundated with calls and requests for assistance,” she said. 
Jankelowitz said a stock-out of ARVS interrupts treatment, which increases the risk of opportunistic infections, treatment failure, ARV drug resistance and death. 

“In addition, stock-outs place a burden on patients, who must travel long distances to reach a health facility. If there is no budget, we need to get to the bottom of why this is the case and what will be done about it,” she said. 
But Maja refuted SSP’s claims. He noted that the active ingredients for most medicines were mainly produced in India and China, and that new legislation in China had resulted in the closure of manufacturing sites in the production of Lemivudine and Abacavir. He said this had affected the production of these two ARVs and had a major impact on the availability of the medicine on a global scale.
“The combination of therapies that are affected are second-line treatments used by some patients. The majority of patients are treated on the first-line fixed dose combination, for which we have adequate quantities,” he said. 

Maja also said there were no budgetary problems in procuring the ARVs. 
“Aspen had a problem with the production of Duranavir, but there were adequate quantities stored in warehouses. We have obtained special authorisation from the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority to bring in stock. This will arrive over three months,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Maja said none of the complaints the group claimed to have received had been forwarded to the national department. 

“We were never asked to intervene. The SSP participates in the forum on medicine availability, which met on September 18, and these concerns were not raised,” Maja said. 
 se-anne.koopman@inl.co.za
The Mercury