Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education has withdrawn a circular to “freeze” the employment of temporary teachers for the final school term after it raised the ire of teacher unions.
The education department issued circular 54 to schools last month, warning against the appointments of substitute or temporary teachers in the last term.

It said that, during this period, schools will be expected to rearrange teachers’ work loads.
The South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu), National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of South Africa (Naptosa) and National Teachers Union (Natu) were all opposed to the circular.

And last Friday, the day after Sadtu publicly raised its opposition at a department event, the department issued a second circular, withdrawing the first one. 
Education spokesperson, Sihle Mlotshwa, said yesterday that the circular was withdrawn because they realised there had been a “misunderstanding on what it sought to communicate”. 

“We want to engage with all the stakeholders on what it means.”
He added that the circular intended to communicate that schools should reshuffle its existing members of staff instead of employing new teachers.

Department head Enock Nzama told The Mercury last week that the circular was a control measure. 
“It’s a way of controlling the entry system so we are not faced with a situation where new employees just emerge, as happened last year. We are not saying no to the employment of teachers; we will hire, but only in exceptional cases.

“If you hire a new maths teacher on October 15, what will that teacher manage to achieve? That is why we are saying the school should reshuffle internally.”
The department said its systems had been breached last year and about 69 teachers had been “fraudulently employed” and have since been removed. 

Sadtu provincial secretary, Nomarashiya Caluza, said: “We are against the unilateral decision taken by the employer about the issues related to staffing at schools. 
"We will, however, address the matter in detail at a media briefing.”

Natu spokesperson, Allen Thompson, said they demanded the circular be withdrawn. “We found the circular to be embarrassing and insulting to teachers, parents and pupils.” 
Thirona Moodley of Naptosa said: “It was quite an irrational circular. It meant teachers would have to take on more work on top of the high work load they already have. It had no foresight.”

The Mercury