Durban - About 20 000 residents have been left without water, following the destruction of uThukela District Municipality water infrastructure.
The municipality yesterday pleaded with community members to come forward with information that might lead to the arrest of those responsible for sabotaging its water infrastructure. The municipality estimates about 20000 people in the “Driefontein Block” area, that covers wards 15, 16, 18 and 19 of the Alfred Duma Local Municipality, could be without water for an indefinite period. 

The entire senior political leadership of uThukela municipality, including Mayor Siphiwe Mazibuko and Deputy Mayor Wendy Sibiya, visited the affected areas and held five different meetings with community members to brief them on the water crisis.
“We estimate that about 20000 people could be left without water, we do not know for how long the situation will remain, as the infrastructure that was damaged costs millions of rand. Replacing it will not be easy,” said municipal spokesperson Jabulani Mkhonza.

He said, in the meantime, the municipality will pay a fortune to deliver water in water-tankers. 
That could spell disaster as the council is already facing financial difficulties and was recently placed under administration.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mkhonza said the burning of the pumps was an escalation in the sabotage of council water infrastructure. 
“There have been incidents where valves have been blocked by people putting foreign objects in, to block the water.

“Our employees would be dumbfounded as to why the water was not coming out in certain areas and when they do a line inspection they will find that the line had been sabotaged.
“We plead with the community to come forward with any information they might have on this incident. They must remember that this is their infrastructure, it is in their communities to service them,” he said. 

KZN MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nomusa Dube-Ncube condemned the act, calling it “an act of treason”. 
“Water is a National Key Point, this deliberate act of vandalism on water infrastructure is a direct attack on our democracy and the right of citizens. The time has come for society to unite and expose these saboteurs so that we can make an example out of them,” said Dube-Ncube.

Dube-Ncube said she has dispatched a team from Cogta to assess and quantify the extent of the damage to these pumps and to come up with measures to be implemented, in order to safeguard the infrastructure. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said a case of malicious damage to property was opened at Ladysmith police station for investigation. 

The Mercury