Durban - One of the 19 men arrested in a case involving explosive devices placed in and around Durban claims his arrest was a case of “mistaken identity”.
Businessman Goolam Haffejee, 38, was granted R100 000 bail in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court yesterday. 

The state also provisionally withdrew charges against seven of the other suspects accused of placing bombs around Durban and of carrying out an attack at the Imam Hussain Mosque in May. 
Haffejee was granted bail because he was not picked out during an identity parade. 
In terms of his bail conditions, he is not allowed to leave the province and had to hand over his passport to the investigating officer.

Court proceedings were finally opened to members of the media yesterday afternoon after they had initially been barred from the hearings last week in terms of a court order. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
However, the use of cellphones was not permitted inside the court.
A small group gathered outside the court in the morning holding signs saying, “No bail for terrorists” and “No place for religious extremism in South Africa”.

In his affidavit supporting his bail application, Haffejee said he was arrested on “suspicion” of having committed offences even though the warrant of arrest was not in his name but rather for his cousin and one of the accused, Farhad Hoomer. 
He said he believed the magistrate who issued the warrants did not apply their mind to the facts relating to each of the accused and “seems to have simply rubber-stamped the documents presented before him/her”.
Haffejee, who is well known in his community of Parlock, said he would plead not guilty to the charges and make the State prove each accusation against him. 

A married man and father of four children, Haffejee also told the court he was the breadwinner of the family and his family would suffer financially and emotionally should he be remanded in custody any longer. 
As part of his call for bail to be granted, Haffejee said he believed the state had no case against him and he was “perplexed” as to how he became a suspect in this matter.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He told the court he would co-operate fully with the investigation and if needed, stand trial to “clear my name”.

“I have not committed any of the offences that I have been charged with.”
The suspects were arrested on October 5 in and around Durban after being linked to explosive devices that were placed at shopping centres across Durban earlier this year, as well as a brutal murder at a Verulam mosque. Police have stated that the motive for the incidents may be extortion.
The suspects face charges of murder, attempted murder, violation of the explosives act, arson, extortion, and the illegal possession of firearms.

The suspects are also accused of kidnapping after police found a man “chained and malnourished inside a dungeon in one of the houses” when it was raided. During the same raids, “a ready-made incendiary device” and other items were discovered, according to the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (Hawks).
 kailene.pillay@inl.co.za
The Mercury