Durban - It was a small victory for members of a private security company today after they apprehended three men wanted in connection with two separate housebreakings in Durban north suburbs today. 
In the first incident, Marshall Security apprehended a man after he and an accomplice allegedly forced their way into a home in Mendoza Drive in uMhlanga Rocks at around 4am. 

Marshall spokesperson, Kyle van Reenen, said the two were disturbed by the owner of the house who pressed his panic button. 
“The suspects fled in an unknown direction. A description of the men was distributed to all Marshall Security vehicles in the area and the two men were later spotted by our Special Operations Team, on Broadwood Drive, a short distance from the initial crime scene,” van Reenen said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
When the two saw the approaching security vehicles, they ran in two different directions. 

Van Reenen said one of the men was apprehended while his friend managed to get away. 
“The suspect was positively identified by the homeowner as being the man who forced entry into his home.  A search of the man revealed him to be in possession of various housebreaking implements as well as an okapi knife,” he said. 
In the second incident, two men were arrested after they allegedly managed to gain entry into a house in Kenneth Kaunda Road after 2pm.

Van Reenen said the men were confronted by a neighbour and ran off. 
He added that the neighbour chased after the men. 
“We were alerted to the scene and a description of the suspects was obtained over the phone and distributed via our emergency contact centre to all responding vehicles in the area.  One of the suspects was apprehended by members of the public in Chelsea drive whilst his accomplice was arrested by Marshall Security on Lonsdale Drive,” van Reenen said. 

He said both men were positively identified by the neighbour and confirmed as being the men who forced entry into the home.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Van Reenen said all three men were handed over to police.
The Mercury