DURBAN - The IFP has offered new Finance Minister Tito Mboweni five key budget tips ahead of his first mid-term budget speech on Wednesday.
Mboweni was appointed finance minister two weeks ago after Nhlanhla Nene’s resignation.

He took to Twitter last Friday to seek some guidance from the Twitterati.




It seems the IFP’s national spokesperson, Mkhuleko Hlengwa, was one of those who heeded the call.
The IFP called on Mboweni to address five key issues.

1. Cut the ballooning public sector wage bill
Speaking at the ANC Western Cape Gaby Shapiro branch’s second annual Kadar Asmal memorial lecture on Saturday, Mboweni warned hard discussions needed to be held on the exorbitant public sector salary bill in the wake of an unabated demand for service delivery.
2. Cut all perks and “nice-to-haves” for all Cabinet Ministers and their Deputies and review the ministerial handbook to ensure austerity measures are implemented

3. Suspend the fuel levy, until such a time our economy grows favourably and our currency strengthens
The IFP, along with the Automobile Association, called on government to suspend the fuel levy in July. The IFP wrote to Nene at the time and called on President Cyril Ramaphosa to “walk his talk”.
4. Roll-out an extensive programme of public-private partnerships with favourable investment conditions and including but not limited to tax breaks for investment projects

5. Promoting all local, emerging and small to medium enterprises as a key driver to restore our ailing economy and create millions of jobs.
Hlengwa said the IFP was calling on Mboweni to tread carefully and said “bailouts are not sustainable”.
He called on public-private partnerships to rescue state owned entreprises, a relief package for fuel and clear government strategy to rescue VBS.

“We also expect the minister to announce an economic recovery plan to steer us out of the current quagmire including but not limited to the reduction of government spending on all spheres.
“Now is the time for Minister Mboweni to show a strong hand and decisive leadership by trimming the fat of government - as he delivers his maiden and yet most important speech in Parliament,” said Hlengwa.
DAILY NEWS