DURBAN - Construction of the new Mall of The West, starting next year, will open up the western area in the first phase of the Ntshongweni Urban Development.
Tongaat Hulett Developments issued a press release detailing the new shopping mall, planned to be 85 000m2, just off the N3 freeway.

The statement said the development, similar to Gateway Mall in uMhlanga, would create 35 000 permanent jobs, 400 000 short-term construction jobs and was expected to generate R700 million in annual rates for eThekwini Municipality and R5.1 billion in annual tax revenue.
It stated: “Located 30km west of Durban on the N3, the 2000 hectare Ntshongweni Urban Development is the next logical urban precinct expected to unlock significant economic activity for the outer west sub-region.”
It confirmed that development rights for the first precinct, the Urban Core, were already in place, with preliminary infrastructure upgrades expected to start early next year.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The design of the mall was described as, “in keeping with the rest of the development phases to come, the Mall of the West’s architectural aesthetic will use connected spaces that create a positive and symbiotic relationship between the built and natural environments”.
Road upgrades to Kassier Road are expected to start in the first quarter of 2019 with development of the new mall expected to start in late 2019, with completion expected in early 2022.
Nicola Muir spokesperson for developers of the new mall Fundamentum Asset Managers, said: “The Mall of the West will follow a concept plan like Umhlanga’s successful Gateway Theatre of Shopping and is at the forefront of building a whole new town to the west of Durban.”

Tongaat Hulett’s Developments’ managing director, Michael Deighton, said the road upgrades “are necessary to accommodate future growth, to be followed by the Mall Of The West which will simulate the original Gateway Theatre of Shopping in its ability to drive this new precinct’s urban and retail core”.
He said they would implement their iThuba programme “to ensure socio-economic benefits, skills and enterprise development initiatives reach the surrounding communities, ensuring inclusive local participation of local businesses and employees”.
“We are just months away from breaking ground and we look forward to working with communities and our partners in bringing this bold vision to fruition.”