Durban - The ANC Youth League says financial woes have forced it to delay its much-anticipated elective conference.
The league’s secretary-general, Njabulo Nzuza, was responding to allegations from various regions in KwaZulu-Natal that the conference, earmarked for last month, was delayed because he did not allow branches across the country to hold meetings to nominate candidates and delegates.

Sources within the ANCYL leadership said the branches could not meet as Nzuza had not sent them nomination packs. 
They said they had been ready to start their branch general meetings since July, but the packages had failed to arrive.

During an interview with Independent Media yesterday, Nzuza said the league’s operations had been badly affected by its debts. 
“We had a problem of liquidation, which we have been struggling with owing to the debt that was left by the leadership of Julius Malema.

“The debt affected the workings of the ANCYL. But we have since paid the amount that was due, and we are resolving issues. 
“That is why now we have sent through BGM (branch general meeting) packs,” he said.

Nzuza declined to say how much the league had paid to settle its debts, and to whom. 
It was reported that in July the South Gauteng High Court had ruled against the league in a defamation case lodged by Western Cape Premier Helen Zille over a statement Malema made before he was fired from the ANC.

Nzuza said his office had from yesterday started to distribute BGM packages throughout the provinces.
He said leaders of the provincial executive committees who sit in the national executive committee (NEC) should have informed regions.

“If regions are confused, it signals that they have not been briefed properly by the representatives (of provinces) who sit in the NEC,” he said.
The next date for the conference would be decided by the league’s NEC, and ANC NEC and task team members would be deployed during a meeting at the weekend, he said.

However, Nzuza denied that there was any factional basis for the delay in the distribution of the packs.
“I do not take sides in the contest as I am the SG. 

“Ours is to deliver a credible congress, and thus I don’t support anyone,” he said.
The Mercury