Durban - Rugby legend Stefan Terblanche is looking forward to riding his first Tsogo Sun Amashova Durban Classic race with his son, Matthew, 10, in tomorrow’s 35km race.
Participants and their supporters can keep an eye out for other rugby greats in the race including John Smit, Breyton Paulse, John Slade, Dick Muir and Adrian Garvey, who’ll be riding with his father, Brian.

They will be riding the 106km distance, while John Allan will take on the 65km event and Warren Brosnihan and his daughter, Jaz, will join Stefan and Matt in the 35km race.
Speaking to the Independent on Saturday this week, Terblanche said since retiring from rugby, he had been able to enjoy different sports which he could not do during his career in case of injury.
“Now I can enjoy different kinds of training because I don’t have to be tackled any more by big forwards,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Apart from cycling five times a week, he also trains in the gym and does some running.
Once dubbed “the fittest man on the rugby field”, Terblanche said he still tried to maintain his fitness levels.
“When you are playing rugby it’s easy to stay fit. But I’m getting older and although I always try to keep fit, it is getting harder and harder.

“I do eat healthily for five days of the week, but not so good on the weekend,” he said.
He started cycling after a friend asked him to join a group on a ride and he was hooked.
“The Amashova was my first race and I really enjoyed the freedom of riding.”

Having now done the race six times, Terblanche is looking forward to riding the shorter distance with his son.
“It will be his first time on a bike on a big road and we are both looking forward to it. My 7-year-old is already asking when he can do it too,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
For Amashova first-timers, Terblanche advised: “Don’t start too fast because there are some big hills. But once you get to Hillcrest, come in fast and enjoy the last few kilometres.

With the Currie Cup semi-final between the Cell C Sharks and the Xerox Golden Lions from Gauteng kicking off at 2.30 this afternoon, Durban is set for a busy weekend.
Commenting on the expected gigantic battle on the field today, Terblanche said the Lions had brought in some big guns, such as Warren Whitely and Elton Jantjies, but that the Sharks “have a pretty good chance of winning.
“It will be a tough day for the Lions but they do have experience on their side, hopefully the Sharks will have enough at home.”

 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY