Durban - Five years after her husband was killed by hitmen his best friend hired, Yuvadia Sewram said they can finally heal knowing the man who masterminded the murder plot will be behind bars for the next 30 years.
The Pietermaritzburg High Court sentenced Rajivee Soni to 30 years imprisonment for planning and executing the murder of his former best friend Dr Bhavish Sewram, whom he suspected of having an affair with his wife, Kerusha Soni.

He was sentenced to 25 years imprisonment for murder, five years for defeating the ends of justice, 18 months for assault and five years for conspiracy to commit murder. The sentences for the secondary charges will run concurrently with the other two sentences, effectively resulting in 30 years imprisonment.
Sewram was gunned down outside his Chota Motala Road surgery in May 2013. He was parked in his white Corsa bakkie while waiting for his receptionist so he could take her home. He was shot in his arm, back and neck. He died at the scene.
“When it happened I knew it was him [Soni]. Throughout the five years of running back and forth to court, I knew it was him. Whether he walked free, I knew he had to answer to a higher power eventually because he knows what he did,” Yuvadia said.

Judge Jacqueline Hendriques handed down the sentence.
Yuvadia said life after her husband's death had not been easy for her or her two daughters, now aged nine and 10.
Her daughter’s, Ysti and Zita were only three and four-years-old when their father was killed.

“When everything happened, I had to really pick up the pieces. The life Bhavish and I planned was completely shattered and it was all because of one man’s ego and cowardice. I was an attorney but when I had the girls, Bhavish and I decided I would stay at home to raise them. I had to go back to work in 2013 and I had to find ways to make my little girls understand what was happening. They were too young,” she said.  
She believes the life they had to live after the death of her husband could have been avoided “but it was Soni’s ego and cowardice that brought this on”.
She also expressed her disappointment in the sentence saying she hoped he would get life imprisonment. 

However, she added; “Nothing can bring back my husband. No form of punishment will ever bring him back.”
Yuvadia said Soni always had a smug, arrogant look when they would see him at court or while he was out on bail.
“But now his money won’t get him far. He has no one else to blame but himself,” Yuvadia said.

She said some of the most difficult moments for her was while Soni was on bail and they would bump into each other.
“I remember just this year I took my girls to the Royal Showgrounds. As we walked in, I saw Soni with his son on his shoulders and his daughter by his side. I just stopped and looked at them and thought to myself ‘Look at us now. Me with no husband and him with no wife.
Reminiscing about happier times, Yuvadia said she was introduced to Sewram in 2005 by a mutual friend. They agreed to go out for coffee for their first date.

“It was a coffee date that lasted five hours. In those five hours, I knew I wanted to marry him. He was humble, loving and sweet. It was only two years later that we were married and a year after that we had our first child,” she said.
It was during the five-year trial that the court heard of Soni’s revenge attacks on the doctor and his family in an attempt to drive them out of Pietermaritzburg.
Soni influenced two women on two separate occasions to lay false charges of sexual assault against Sewram. His crusade to destroy the well-known doctor’s reputation continued when Soni hired people to shoot at the doctor with a high-powered paintball. Sewram sustained injuries in the attack.

Soni then decided he had to kill his former friend and approached Brian Treasurer, a former policeman, with an offer of R100 000 to carry out the deed.
Treasurer enlisted the help of Mfaniseni Nxumalo and Sabelo Dlamini to help him and on May 13, 2013, the trio drove to the doctor’s surgery. Treasurer waited in the vehicle while Dlamini got out and shot Sewram.
The accused’s co-conspirators, Treasurer, Dlamini and Nxumalo had previously been sentenced. Dlamini had pleaded guilty to the murder and had received a 25-year-sentence, while Nxumalo and Treasurer were sentenced to life imprisonment in September 2015.

Treasurer died earlier this year while serving his sentence.
Soni intends on appealing his conviction and sentencing and was granted leave to appeal on November 22.
The Mercury