Durban - Police have yet to make an arrest in an investigation into how officers from a SAPS Public Order Policing unit in KwaZulu-Natal, were allowed to be used as escorts for pupils at a Newcastle high school.
At the weekend, a video surfaced on social media showing pupils being escorted to their Grade 12 dance by officers dressed in full riot gear. The pupils were driven to the venue in a SAPS Nyala.

By this afternoon, police had not made any arrests despite acting Provincial Commissioner Lieutenant General Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi ordering the head of the POP unit to “investigate the incident in earnest”.
Following the release of the video, which has now gone viral, Mkhwanazi condemned the action.
“I am deeply disturbed by what I observed. I have instructed that these police officials that appear in that video be investigated in terms of our disciplinary regulations as their conduct is not in line with our code of conduct and the objectives of the SAPS as per the constitution of this country. I am in agreement with the majority of citizens who voiced their concern on social media, that our resources could have been put to better use,” he said.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Related ArticlesSAPS management outraged at police escort for matric danceIFP wants 'heads to roll' over police escort for matric dance
Meanwhile, the Inkatha Freedom Party, has called for those involved in the incident to be suspended.
IFP KZN provincial spokesperson on community safety and liaison, Blessed Gwala, said the matter deserved the urgent attention from the KZN MEC of Community Safety and Liaison, Mxolisi Kaunda.
“He must institute his own investigation. Police officials should always behave in a professional manner. Every member of SAPS signed the SAPS Code of Conduct and failure by any member to abide by the Code of Conduct, could result in an investigation being launched for which the member could face departmental steps taken against that member,” he said.

“Citizens are fed up with seeing officers of the law blatantly abuse their power and taxpayers’ money. This abuse of state resources is not only unethical behaviour but also a misconduct,” Gwala added.
Daily News