Durban - Operations came to a halt at Durban metro police department’s biggest station, in Albert Park, yesterday as dozens of officers downed tools and locked the gates to the premises.
About 100 officers embarked on a strike over various concerns, including claims of victimisation, favouritism and racism at the station.

Among the claims made by those who spoke to The Mercury on condition of anonymity are that certain toilets are reserved for Indian officers.
This, and other claims, were put to metro police head Steve Middleton, who held a three-hour meeting with union representatives yesterday to try to resolve the impasse.
Contacted for comment yesterday afternoon, Middleton said he was still digesting the grievances. 

“They (representatives of Samwu and Imatu) have tabled a list of grievances and/or complaints they have asked that I, as head of metro police, resolve. I have a feedback meeting with them tomorrow, therefore it will be unfair of me to comment on anything you have related to now as I am still in the process of digesting all that information and then coming up with resolutions to certain challenges when I meet them to give feedback.” AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
One of the union representatives, Joe Mabaso, confirmed that racism was one of the grievances tabled yesterday. 
“Yes, the workers tell us there is that toilet reserved for Indians only. No explanation was ever given as to why this is so,” he said.

Another issue is that many of the officers are forced to patrol on foot because they are denied the use of official cars.
An officer who did not want to be named said: “This means our response is even slower. Cars are only given to those who are given preferential treatment.”
The Albert Park station is responsible for policing the CBD and suburbs including Umbilo, Morningside, Glenwood, Bayhead and some parts of Chesterville.

Mabaso alleged only black officers were forced to do patrols on foot. 
The members also want some of the strict overtime conditions relaxed. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Mabaso said: “To qualify for overtime, members are expected to issue a minimum of 40 fines per (four-day) shift, and they do not want that.”

One officer said: “Enforcement is not meant to be only punitive to the public; it is meant to educate as well. There has to be a balance. If you force us to issue these many fines it means we are seen by the public as punishing them. That is why we had taxi operators marching against metro police, saying they were being targeted.”
 bheki.mbanjwa@inl.co.za
The Mercury