Durban - Eight people lost their lives, while 17 people were left injured in several road accidents across KwaZulu-Natal at the weekend.
 On Saturday night Netcare 911 paramedics responded to a serious collision on the R61 in Leisure Bay on the South Coast where a car and a bakkie were involved in a head on collision.

 

Shawn Herbst, Netcare 911 spokesperson said the collision resulted in the car bursting into flames.
 “The two people who were in the motor vehicle were burnt beyond recognition and the other two people who were in the bakkie died on impact,” said Herbst.

 

KZN SAPS spokesperson, Captain Nqobile Gwala said the fifth victim was taken to hospital where he later died.
“A case of culpable homicide is being investigated by Port Edward SAPS,”said Gwala.

Earlier in the day a pedestrian lost his life when he was knocked down by a car while crossing a road in Verulam.
 “The patient an adult male was found to have no signs of life and sadly was declared deceased,” said Herbst.

 Garrith Jamieson, the spokesperson for Rescue Care said a biker believed to be around thirty years of age was killed in an accident on Edwin Swales Drive near the onramp to the M4 Bluff in the early hours of Saturday morning.
 

“Advanced Life Support Paramedics were called to assist and worked on the man for approximately one hour trying to resuscitate him however, his injuries were too severe and he passed away on the scene,” said Jamieson.
 In another serious collision on the M1 Higginson Highway near the unit 5 R.K. Khan offramp, one person was killed when two vehicles collided before leaving the roadway and colliding into trees at the bottom of a bank.

 

 The Jaws of Life were used by the Durban Fire Department to free them.
 “Once freed the injured were carefully extricated before being carried up the bank to awaiting ambulances,” he said.

 

The driver of the one vehicle was declared dead on the scene.
 14 people sustained injuries ranging from minor to serious, according to Herbst, when a minibus taxi and a light delivery vehicle collided on Saturday afternoon on Nodalane Road in Izingolweni.

 “The Fire and Rescue Services had to use the Jaws of Life to free one of the occupants.
All the patients were treated on scene and transported by various ambulance services to hospital for further treatment,” said Herbst.

The Mercury