DURBAN - THE KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health has taken over the Siloah Lutheran Hospital in Zululand, saving 96 jobs in the process. 

“The price [for this hospital] and other matters are being negotiated by the Department of Health, supported by Public Works, with the owners of this facility.

The department said the hospital was on the brink of closure before the deal was struck on Thursday. The government - as represented by the Health and Public Works departments - and owners of the hospital were still negotiating the price for the hospital. In the meantime, the Health department has absorbed salaries for 96 staff members at the hospital.  
KZN Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said the closure of the hospital which was built by the Lutheran Church Ministries would have been catastrophic.
“When it was brought to our attention that the board of this facility was experiencing difficulties running its affairs and had run out of money, we took a resolution to extend its grant funding while exploring ways in which we could take over its running, and rationalise its services,” said Dhlomo. 
He said he was delighted that the hospital board and the department had come to an agreement after months of negotiations. 
He said the decision to keep the hospital open was supported by Premier Willies Mchunu, the provincial Cabinet and President Cyril Ramaphosa.
“From October 1, workers have been put on payroll… All of them except just 9 due to glitches which are being resolved, have confirmed that they’ve received their salaries.
“The price [for this hospital] and other matters are being negotiated by the Department of Health, supported by Public Works, with the owners of this facility.
“We felt it was important not to leave our people destitute, in terms of access to health services. When we want to decentrali ze and improve access to health of all our citizens as the National Health Insurance (NHI) is saying, it would have been an anomaly to close the facility. Rather, we’re re-arranging and making sure the facility can continue working in a rationalized manner,” said Dhlomo.
A nurse said the announcement by the department had brought relief to them. 
Nurse Cynthia Khululiwe Buthelezi said: “We were very worried. We didn’t know where we stood. There was a lot of uncertainty, hesitation and unanswered questions. But all of that is gone now. We wish to express our heartfelt thanks to the government.”
Daily News