Durban - The couple who slipped and fell 8m off small Karkloof Falls earlier this month are on the road to recovery after André Pretorius woke up from his medically-induced coma last Thursday.
A friend of the family, Kayleen Esterhuizen, said André is awake, alert and was moved out of the ICU the day after he woke up.

“André knows when someone is talking to him and he will move his head to see you,” said Esterhuizen.
He still has a feeding tube and a tracheotomy, as well as limited movement to his right side.
“Doctors are very happy with his progress and know he will get stronger every day,” said Esterhuizen. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Related ArticlesLOOK: Couple rescued after Karkloof fallMan fighting for life after Karkloof fall
André’s wife Mar-Louise will be discharged today after receiving successful eye surgery on the same day her husband woke from his coma.
“My eye operation went well, (although) it took a lot longer than expected. They said (under two hours) but it took them four hours as there were so many little broken bones, but they are happy with the end result,” said Mar-Louise. 
She is receiving physio and is able to get on and off the bed on her own.

“She is very strong-willed and is determined to walk by herself as soon as possible,” said Esterhuizen.
André saw his wife for the first time since the accident on Sunday night when she video-called him. “I spoke for a bit and could see him move,” she said.
After ending the call, a friend called back to say André’s eyes were open.

“He looked at me. He moved his hands and legs and I believe it was because he heard my voice,” said Mar-Louise.
André’s medical bills are R630 000 and, thanks to a fund set up by Esterhuizen and Backabuddy, R101881 has been raised for the couple, who had cancelled their medical aid about three months ago to afford therapy - not covered by medical aid - for their son.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“There is a long journey ahead, but today was a good day,” said Mar- Louise.

 karen.singh@inl.co.za
The Mercury