Durban - South African pupils are hard at work, studying for their end of year exams. For many teenagers it’s the promise of a long summer holiday that will get them through, but for driven students, a lot could be at stake. These are the marks that will determine whether they get into their university of choice.
“Year-end results in Grades 11 and 12 are the benchmarks that universities use to pick candidates. Consistent strong performance stands out and can land an early acceptance,” explained Country Manager for Crimson Education,  Rebecca Pretorius.

The global education company assists young people to gain entry to top-ranked universities in the United States and United Kingdom, with tutoring strategies that produce acceptance rates five times higher than the average at the likes of Harvard and Stanford.
She said top-ranked universities want well-rounded, responsible and driven students who will make the most of the opportunities they offer. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
While it is not the only part of a successful application, academic performance is a key component,” Pretorius said.

 When it comes to preparing for school exams, Pretorius offers students the following tips:
Find your motivation – Dream big about tertiary education. Googling your career interests, leading campuses and the many opportunities for learning and independence available at university can be a great motivation to get through the slog of studying.
 Establish a routine – Mark out periods of time for concentrated study, regular breaks, meals and relaxation during the study period. Avoid late nights and sleep-ins that mess with your routine.

 Set objectives – Look at the amount of work you need to review and set daily and weekly objectives for covering it – then celebrate your progress.
 Unplug – Cell phones and social media channels are the enemy of concentration. If you are easily distracted by them, make unplugging a part of your routine.
Manage stress – Academic pressure can put a lot of stress on teenagers, especially those for whom high marks don’t come easy. Remember to set aside time for out-of-school activities and your passions - they matter to universities too.

For parents, Pretorius recommends taking an interest not only in a pupil’s current curricula but also their plans for further education.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“Financing university education is a big pill to swallow – but with an inspired student come opportunities to tap into financial aid. Investing in tutoring and careers-focussed mentoring pays off in the long run, as a degree from a top university taps into better job opportunities and powerful alumni networks," Pretorius said.
Daily News