Durban - A lack of buccal DNA swab kits, damaged 'slum' infrastructure, condemned cells, safety risks and fire hazards. These were just some of the problems identified during an oversight visit to a three police stations in the city this week. 
The visit was conducted by the Democratic Alliance Women's Network and DA Pride, under the leadership of DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Police, Dianne Kohler Barnard. The group visited Wentworth, Malvern and Cato Manor police stations. 

“The visits were targeted at assessing the victim friendly units that should be available at the stations. The three stations that were visited were SAPS Wentworth, Malvern and Cato Manor. The oversight visits were also an opportunity to assess the state and readiness of the police in these areas to fight the increasing crime rate that is currently holding our communities at ransom,” explained central Durban chairperson, Councillor Christopher Pappas.
She praised the Wentworth police station commander, stating that he was able to efficiently explain matters to them without having to call in another member of staff. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"Newlands East police station had stock shortages and I was shocked that they did not have DNA kits. There is a multi-billion Rand database and yet the station did not have equipment. The station is situated in a shopping centre. This poses a security risk for police. They have to park in a supermarket parking lot. There is zero security for police," she said. 

She noted the tyres that were being stacked next to the commander's office. 
"One spark and that entire shopping centre will go up in smoke," she said. 
Commenting about the Malvern police station, in Queensburgh, Kohler Barnard referred to the station as a "hundred year old farmhouse which is falling apart".

She said there was water leaking down from the ceiling, holes in the roof and an air conditioner that is held up by a box. 
"There are worn floors, two cells that are condemned and no toilets. It's a slum building," she said. 
When The Mercury approached KwaZulu-Natal head of corporation communication and liaison, Brigadier Jay Naicker, for comment, Naicker said the site inspection was not official and he was unable to comment. 

“The acting provincial commissioner was not informed of any official oversight visit and therefore we are not in a position to respond,” he said. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Mercury