Durban - Life is about to dramatically change for 71-year-old grandmother Yaza Maphumulo as she moves out of her one-room shack and into a newly built two-bedroom home with a kitchen and a bathroom.
The one-room rondavel in Danganya, uMgababa, 36km south of Durban on the KwaZulu-Natal coast, which had no water, electricity or windows, flooded when there was heavy rain.

Five people occupy the mud shack, built by Maphumulo. The kitchen is a separate structure outside and the family has no access to electricity because their meter box was stolen two years ago. Water is limited.
The new home, valued at R110000, including labour and materials, is provided by eThekwini Special Needs Project which partnered with Habitat SA and the KZN Department of Human Settlements, eThekwini Municipality and construction firm Dezzo Holdings.
“I am so happy about our new house. We will have windows now and I can look outside when it’s raining,” said Maphumulo.

The family’s home was built last week by a team of volunteer employees from @home. The family is expected to move in this week.
World Habitat Day was celebrated on October 1.

 
 
  HOMEOWNER Yaza Maphumulo will soon be able to leave her dilapidated rondavel she shares with four family members. Her new home is being built by volunteers from @home and the Habitat for Humanity SA team. 
 

Habitat for Humanity SA programme manager, Mdu Luthuli, said Maphumulo’s current home was the worst of the worst.
The plan is to deliver 1000 housing units in three years with the enhanced people’s housing process harnessing community contributions and other partnerships. The project has completed 120 houses in uMgababa.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“We have a programme, One Garden One Home. Once the house is completed, the family is provided with a wheelbarrow and gardening tools. We are making a difference in particular in this area. For us to be able to build more houses and to serve more families, we definitely need support from the community and different companies to support the idea either financially or to come on site and volunteer to give hope to those in need,” said Luthuli.

 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY