Durban - The battle between suspended Msunduzi municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe and the council is heating up with the council struggling to finalise the disciplinary process against him.
Councillors were told yesterday that Hadebe had allegedly refused to accept a letter inviting him to a disciplinary hearing and had directed it be sent to his attorney. 

Hadebe was suspended a few weeks ago after a council investigation found him guilty of violating procedure. This was after an audio clip emerged of a person, believed to be him, and a colleague discussing fixing jobs for candidates chosen by politicians.
Sources in the council yesterday said it had sent a letter to Hadebe’s attorney and even emailed a copy of the letter, but to date, it has not received any responses.

“From what we have learnt, his lawyers have allegedly told him that he should not respond to it as they feel the process was illegal. They argue that he should have been given an opportunity to appear before the investigator and state his side.”
DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said he was concerned with the delays in moving the case against Hadebe.

“The findings by the investigator are serious, some of them are criminal so I am concerned that instead of firing Hadebe the council might be forced to pay him out as it recently did with another senior official after he challenged, not the case against him, but procedure,” he said. 
IFP councillor Thinasonke Ntombela said it was demanding that due process be followed. 

Hadebe rubbished the allegations that there had been delays in the process. 
He also expressed concerns that a matter that had been discussed in committee had been leaked.

“We are responding to the council and we are responding to the matters as they arise. What I can say about the charges is that they are concocted, they are spurious and politically motivated. That is something I have stated in my response,” Hadebe said. 
Msunduzi mayor Themba Njilo had not responded to a request for comment at the time of publish. 

The Mercury