Durban - Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane was shocked by the discovery of gross bullying, poor discipline and alcohol trading in front of a school gate during his site visits yesterday.
Dlungwane said he was worried about the “goings-on” at the Lihlithemba High School near Ndwedwe, saying it was clear that something was not right.

He visited several schools yesterday to assess the progress of Grade 12 exams.
He visited Vukuzakhe High School in uMlazi where 247 pupils, from four schools displaced by service delivery protests in the Ngonyameni area, were moved.
His visit to Lihlithemba was sparked by media reports that the school’s deputy principal Bheki Mthethwa was injured during an altercation between pupils. 

Mthethwa tried to stop the fight when he fell and seriously injured his arm.
“When we arrived at the school, we found learners walking around with nothing to do. We found that to be concerning. We would prefer to see that learners who are not writing exams busy in classes. 
“This is a sign there is something not “strong enough” at the school and that is something that we need to attend to,” said Dlungwane. 

He said he was unhappy that a tavern was operating directly in front of the school. 
“That is not allowed. I will be taking strong steps to deal with that place. 
“I will engage the MEC of Economic Development Sihle Zikalala to revoke the licence of this tavern.

It cannot be that when learners come to the school, they walk past the tavern, when they go on breaks and when they go home, it’s the same,” he said.
Speaking on their ambitions for this year, Dlungwane said the department was looking to eliminate schools with a record of achieving a zero percent pass rate.
“Last year we had three schools that achieved zero percent and the aim is to eliminate those schools. 

“We also want to decrease the number of schools that achieved less than 60%,” he said.
Dlungwane said KwaZulu-Natal, with the largest number of pupils writing matric exams, could not afford to drop the pass rate as that would drag down the entire country.
“Last year we were able to act as a buffer for the national results. 

“While other provinces dropped, we increased and this improved the national picture. 
“We cannot afford to drop as that would drag down the national numbers,” he said. 
 thami.magubane@inl.co.za

The Mercury