Durban - Management of King Shaka International Airport was extremely proud to welcome British Airways, one of the world’s leading airlines, on its maiden flight to the airport. The flight landed early this morning. 
KSIA general manager, Terence Delomoney, said the commencement of the direct service between Durban and London by British Airways is the result of intensive collaboration with the airline and among tourism bodies, provincial and local government and other members of the Durban Direct initiative.

"For us as management of King Shaka International Airport, the launch of direct flights to and from London three times a week is a notable milestone in the growth of our airport since opening in 2010. At that time, we had invested some R7-billion in new airport infrastructure, which is typically required to endure for decades. Following our successful hosting of the FIFA 2010 World Cup, the airport and its stakeholders worked hard to build on the fantastic foundation of this entirely new infrastructure," he said. 
Delomoney said KSIA's passenger numbers have risen steadily in recent years with an average increase of 8% a year over the last three years. 
"King Shaka International Airport handled some 5.6-million passengers during the 2017/2019 financial year, and we are forecasting that we will handle 5.9-million passengers by the end of the current financial year; we are confident that we will see more growth in the coming years," he said. 

Delomoney added that the arrival of British Airways for the Durban-to-London route will make an important contribution not only to growing passenger numbers but also to enhancing the international status of King Shaka International Airport as a hub for economic growth in the region.
"We believe that this route has the potential to become a daily service and we will continue working with British Airways to provide any support needed to make this a reality. King Shaka International Airport already meets all the requirements to land aircraft such as the Boeing 787-8 Dreamliner that British Airways will use on the route, as well as the giant Airbus A380," he said. 
He added that the airport is investing in the region of R420-million in new infrastructure projects which include the extension of taxiways and the addition of two further aircraft Code F stands to create for capacity for expansion.

Commenting during the welcoming ceremony held at King Shaka International Airport, KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Sihle Zikalala said it was important to remember that the central role that air services play in stimulating economic development. 
"New international and regional air routes open up new opportunities across a full spectrum of sectors including tourism and leisure, business and commercial, cargo and manufacturing. It is no coincidence that the fastest growing and most sustainable local economies across the world are served by airports with wide-reaching regional and international networks," he siad. 
Daily News