Durban - The South African Council for Educators (Sace) has warned about the high number of teachers involved in the rape of, and sexual relations with, their pupils.
In a report, tabled in Parliament, Sace said there were 78 cases of rape and sexual relations involving teachers with pupils in the 2017/18 financial year.

The report comes as more cases of rape and sexual abuse against pupils are reported in various parts of the country.
The South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) in KwaZulu-Natal yesterday also spoke out against a toxic environment fuelling violence against teachers and pupils in schools.

Most of the incidents happened in KwaZulu-Natal, where 19 cases of rape were reported against teachers.
This was followed by the Western Cape, where there were 14 cases of rape and sexual relations with pupils recorded by the council.

In Gauteng, Sace investigated 13 cases of rape and sexual relations with pupils against teachers.
Gauteng was followed by Mpumalanga, with eight such cases reported by the council.

Sace said it was receiving support in its efforts to deal with the problem of unprofessional conduct by teachers.
“It gives us great pleasure again to report that many parents, pupils and other stakeholders, including the Department of Social Development and the SAPS, have already been spoken to by Sace and are receptive to the message and are giving their support to the programme. 

“They gave their commitment to support Sace and the system to eradicate abuse of pupils and to support educators and the profession,” stated the report.
Sace said pupils and parents have a huge role to play in clamping down on these offences against pupils by teachers.

Sadtu attributed the culture of violence in schools to reckless statements from student leaders
Sadtu’s provincial secretary, Nomarashiya Caluza, said toxic statements by the Congress of South Africa Students (Cosas) were among the key drivers of violence against teachers by pupils.

Cosas recently made a statement, telling pupils to “hit back when hit by teachers”. 
“Ever since that statement by Cosas, that the learners should hit back at the teachers, there has just been an explosion of violence against teachers, maybe Cosas should be addressed to retract that statement,” Caluza said.

She said it was clear that violence was motivated by Cosas’ statement as all the violence against teachers was almost exclusively at high schools where Cosas was organising.
Caluza also said parents needed to play a leading role in protecting teachers, saying they had an obligation to get involved in their children’s schooling.

“An attack on teachers is an attack on the basic human right to an education.
“If the society acknowledges the importance of education, it must equally value the importance of teachers and provide all the necessary support and protection to teachers,” Caluza said.

The provincial secretary of Cosas, Khethelo Goba, described the statement as the “slip of the tongue” which it has since tried to correct.
“As Cosas, we are also not happy about what is happening at the schools, and we want an environment where schools are safe for both learners and teachers.

“We have called for strong security at schools because with security, such things would not be happening,” said Goba.
The Mercury