Durban - The precinct around the Verulam Magistrate's Court was surrounded by police and extreme security measures were in place as 19 suspects arrested in connection with bomb threats in the city are due to appear in court today. 
Security officials at the court refused to allow media into the Verulam Family Court - a more secure and bigger venue for the high profile case.

A security guard at the court told the media that the matter would proceed at 2pm but he was not certain whether media would be allowed into the court.
"Right now there's only this case happening in the court. It's closed off to anyone else. Only family of the suspects are allowed in for now," the security guard said.

Through the glass doors, a number of men, believed to be family of the suspects could be seen seated on benches in the court foyer.
Police officials left the area shortly after 9am saying they will return before the matter is heard at 2pm.

Background
By late last night, police had arrested the gang who are believed to be a part of a larger syndicate responsible for planting explosive devices at the Verulam mosque and several Woolworths stores in Durban since May. 

The syndicate planned to terrorise businesses int he Durban are by planting incendiary devices to create panic among consumers.
Incident timeline:



 May 10: A man died after his throat was slit and two others were stabbed in an attack on a Verulam Mosque. Days later, Hawks found an explosive device beneath the pulpit of the mosque.
 July 5: Two devices were detonated, causing a fire at the Woolworths stores at Gateway and The Pavilion.
 July 7: Two explosive devices were found in Morningside near Greyville Racecourse. Earlier, another was found at the Woolworths Gateway store and defused by a bomb squad.
 July 9: An explosive device was detonated at a Spar in Wentworth.
 July 12: Shoppers and staff at Cornubia Mall, Mount Edgecombe, were evacuated after a bomb threat at Woolworths and Commercial City in Durban’s CBD was evacuated because of a 15th floor bomb scare.
 July 19: A suspected explosive device was found at the Woolworths central Durban branch, after a bomb scare in the La Lucia branch earlier in the day.


The Mercury