Durban - The Msunduzi Municipality has resigned itself to writing off most of the R 2billion owed for services.
Msunduzi Mayor Themba Njilo told a media briefing yesterday that a three-month amnesty is aimed at dealing with financial losses resulting from unmetered and unbilled services and providing an opportunity to register indigent households so they can get discounts on basic services.

The municipality has 180 000 customers on its database and it is believed this number will increase once customers apply for the amnesty and get registered. 
“I would like to encourage customers to apply for amnesty during the open period,” said the mayor, warning of tougher sanctions once the amnesty window period had lapsed. 
After the amnesty, the mayor said, there would be a council wide audit and defaulting customers would be identified and dealt with.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“The municipality can charge a penalty as contained in the Register of Tariffs and recover up to 36 months of lost revenue,” said Njilo. “We are hoping to recover just about R250million of the more than R2bn owed to us. That would be a very positive step because most of the debt owed is likely to be written off,” he added.
The municipality’s debt book is at R2.9bn with households accounting for more than 60% of the debt while government and businesses make up the rest. 
Njilo also said the municipality was looking at ways to make it easier for consumers to pay their accounts. 

“We are planning to open a permanent office at the Liberty Midlands Mall. It will also be open on weekends, to make it easier to pay. Among the challenges identified is that the city centre is crowded, there is no parking and the working hours are not convenient for ratepayers,” he said.
Njilo said the government departments will not be part of the amnesty and the city will actively recoup money owed.
DA councillor Sibongiseni Majola said the amnesty was necessary to address the problems around the council’s debt book. 

“We have a debt book of R2.9bn. This will also assist in developing a proper database for ratepayers.”
But he warned that the amnesty could present challenges if not properly managed.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
IFP councillor Thinasonke Ntombela said they supported the amnesty as it would help to improve the council’s finances and would help ratepayers who were struggling to meet their payments. 

The Mercury