Durban - Government departments and other entities owe the eThekwini Municipality close to R1billion for various services.
A report presented at the city’s executive committee meeting yesterday revealed that, of the R929 million owed to the municipality by various government departments, R30m has been outstanding for more than 90 days.

“Properties owned by the Ingonyama Trust make up about 46% of the debt over 90 days,” the report stated.
When the matter came up before the committee yesterday, DA councillor Heinz de Boer called for the city to be as tough on government departments as it was on residents.
He said it was unfair that departments got away with owing the city millions of rand while poor residents faced disconnections on a daily basis.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“We can’t continue like this. If you treat me in a certain way because of policy, you must treat the departments in a certain way. Policy is policy - we have to rectify this,” said De Boer.
In August alone, eThekwini had 9669 electricity disconnections and 13389 water disconnections.
Earlier this year there was an outcry after the city disconnected some poor Section 21 schools for non-payment. Members of the council had to intervene and reverse the decision.

Councillor Mondli Mthembu said the city could not start disconnecting electricity to schools and hospitals just because departments owed it money.
“You always have to think about the extent to which the disconnection will affect people and how many people will be affected,” he said.
Municipal employees, councillors and ward committee members owed the municipality a total of R14m in August.

Meanwhile, the various parastatals owed the municipality R209m. 
These include Eskom, Transnet, Prasa and Ithala, among a number of others.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The report also revealed that the city had to write off R1.2m in the current financial year as this amount was considered unrecoverable.

 bheki.mbanjwa@inl.co.za
The Mercury