DURBAN - THE regional secretary of the ANC Youth League in eThekwini became a victim of crime when he was hijacked, kidnapped and dumped more than 20 kilometres away on Friday when armed criminals made of with his Audi S3. 
Thinta Cibane's car is yet to be recovered by the police. He was on his way to his Musgrave home after buying newspapers in Overport, at about 5am on Friday morning when the incident happened. 
Thulisa Ndlela, a spokesperson for the ANC Youth League in Durban, said three armed men accosted Cibane and shoved him in the back of his car before driving about 20 kilometres south dumping him at the Uganda informal settlement in Isipingo.
“He is still very traumatised by the incident,” said Ndlela on Friday, revealing Cibane struggled to remember his licence plates. 
“Three guys came with guns and they asked him to get out of the car and they put him in the backseat. They drove him to Uganda (Isipingo) and they dumped him at an informal settlement where he was able to call for help,” he said.  AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

  
  
   eThekwini ANC Youth League secretary, Thinta Cibane, had his Audi hijacked in Durban on Friday. Picture: Facebook
  
 
 
  
  
   eThekwini ANC Youth League secretary, Thinta Cibane, had his Audi hijacked in Durban on Friday. Picture: Facebook
  
 
Ndlela said they were shaken by the incident which came just hours after the death of an ANC councillor in uMlazi. Sbu “Bhabhani” Maphumulo was gunned down outside his home on Thursday night by unknown men.
“We are trying by all means to talk about everything else but this incident,” he said. “He was held at gunpoint and with all these political killings he would have thought maybe he was next. We are trying not to talk to him much about the incident, so we tried to make political jokes and that sort of thing,” he said. 
Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala confirmed police were investigating a case of carjacking.
Durban's Metro Police top cop Steve Middleton said on Facebook that Cibane was "safe and sound". 

 
Meanwhile, his Comrades wished him well on social media. AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads



Durban Mayor Zandile Gumede was among those who wished Cibane well. 
Loosely translated, she said: 'I wish they can find the car. We thank God that he is still alive, what have we done as eThekwini, our youth is not safe, Lord help us'.


DAILY NEWS