Durban - Members of the executive committee of eThekwini Municipality have expressed concerns about the seemingly growing number of homeless people living on the streets of Durban.
The matter was discussed during an executive committee meeting yesterday and some councillors called for action, saying the city had failed to deal with the problem.

The discussion arose as councillors considered a recommendation from the security and emergency committee. 
The committee, chaired by deputy mayor Fawzia Peer, recommended that the council must support the establishment of a multi-sectoral task team to look into the issue of vagrancy in the city.
Peer said such a team would involve representatives from government, academia, NGOs and the city.

After the establishment of the task team, the head of safer cities will have to provide the necessary support to the process and future programmes linked to it.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The team would deal with aspects such as infrastructure, the reunification of the homeless with their families, and dealing with the scourge of drug abuse, which has been found to have a direct link with homelessness.
Peer said vagrancy was growing in Durban but pointed out that many other cities, including New York, where there are reported to be 4million homeless people, were facing a similar problem.

DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said the problems of homelessness and drug abuse were out of control in the city, lamenting the fact that the city did not seem to have any real strategy to deal with the problem.
Making matters worse, she said, was that the city did not have its own rehabilitation centre, while the provincial one was under-resourced.
Metro police were also failing to deal effectively with the problem and drugs had become freely available, Graham said. 

“There are no budgetary commitments to deal with homelessness. All metro police are doing is move people from one area to another. Talk shop after talk shop is not going to solve the problem,” she said.
IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the city would first need to profile the homeless people so that it could come up with a targeted intervention that worked.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He said some of the people on the streets were not really homeless as some came from well-off families.

Mondli Mthembu, another executive committee member, said the recommendation presented by Peer's committee showed that the deputy mayor was worried about the plight of the homeless and wanted to find solutions.
 bheki.mbanjwa@inl.co.za
The Mercury