The arrest of Farhad Hoomer of Nugget Road, Reservoir Hills and his identification as the alleged ring leader of a terror group has left his neighbours in fear.
Ron Naidoo, a community safety activist in the area, said the neighbourhood feared for the safety of their families. Others expressed similar sentiments but did not want to reveal their identities.

“We were completely shocked to find out about the house raid, the discovery of Isis flags and the kidnapped man who was rescued by the police,” said Naidoo.
“It is also mind-boggling that it happened in our street.”
Naidoo said she was among a group of people who had an argument with Hoomer earlier this year regarding safety in the area.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The group of residents discussed crime in the area but Hoomer took offence that the meetings were held in the street outside his house.
“The scary part is that if he gets bail nobody knows what he can do.
“When I heard about the discovery of bomb devices in his house, I was finished. I was flooded with thoughts about the mosque incident in Verulam,” said Naidoo.

Others told the Sunday Tribune Hoomer kept to himself.
Visitors who arrived by car drove straight into a garage and the doors closed straight thereafter.
On most Fridays, a group of men arrived at the house for the midday Islamic prayer and never spent time outside. One resident said the neighbourhood was concerned about Hoomer’s apparent links or sympathies with the terror group Islamic State. Most Muslims reject their ideology.

“If they can plant bombs at Woolies, who knows what they could do or were planning to do in this community.
“It is a good thing that the media ban has been lifted in court so we can follow up on the case.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“What happens in court is something that involves us,” said the resident.

Meanwhile, it is believed a foreign national who was rescued during the raid and admitted to the Durban hospital has since been discharged.