Durban - Whether it’s sliding in mud in the middle of a storm or dropping onto a ledge in the middle of a raging bushfire - the crew from Durban’s Rescuetech Search and Rescue have been there and done that.
World Trauma Day, on Wednesday, marked the impact of trauma and saving lives in those critical moments on unsung heroes around the world.

The Independent on Saturday spoke to Rescuetech commander Nic Holmes about rescues made by its team, all of whom are volunteers with day jobs.
An engineer by profession, Holmes has been with the NPO since 2010 and they work closely with many other emergency organisations.
“I was rock climbing at the gym when I heard about it (Rescuetech) and the next minute I was in the middle of it all,” he said.

While there are trained paramedics on their team, the unit is primarily a search and rescue organisation with specialised skills in rope work, confined spaces and water rescues.
He said the team’s most hair-raising incident had been when a firefighter tripped and fell down a 40m cliff in Winston Park during a bushfire.
“He fell onto the cliff below and had hurt his leg and shoulder. He had tied himself to a rock and the fire was burning all around him. It took more than seven hours to get him out.

“We had to take into account the flames and smoke, as well as the fact that our equipment, such as ropes and anchors, were flammable and we didn’t know whether they could withstand the heat of the blaze.”
It was too steep to get the injured man up the cliff and an emergency helicopter was called in which fanned the flames even more. The firefighter was rescued with minutes to spare.
News of the daring rescue, regarded as one of the most dangerous and heart-stopping to have taken place in the area, quickly spread and the team involved received the Centrum Guardian Award for bravery.

Holmes said they had rescued many four-legged friends and those of the feathered variety.
“We rescued a falcon sitting in a tree and we have rescued many dogs and goats off cliff faces, as well as dogs in confined spaces such as drain pipes.
“One incident which tested us was the rescue of a dog from a cliff face during a storm. We thought we could do it before the storm, but it caught up with us. It became very slippery on the cliff face with mud and water pouring down onto us as we secured the dog.”

While he described dogs as “often more co-operative than humans” when it came to being rescued, Holmes said throughout each incident, they talked to the victim, explaining exactly what was happening around them.
To deal with the impact of trauma on team members themselves, after each rescue, when the gear is packed, the team gather and the rule is “nobody leaves the scene until the scene has been discussed”.
And there are lots of good outcomes to look back on. Holmes recalled meeting a cameraman who looked familiar. It turned out the team had rescued him during an attempted suicide.

“He had jumped off a gorge and everybody had decided he was probably dead. I was with a fireman and we were looking over the edge when we heard some garbled shouting. He was still alive and he was rescued. Meeting up with him two years later, he said that we had changed his life.”
Ranging from a teacher to an engineer, pilot and even soil scientist with a few paramedics thrown in, why do this team put their lives on the line for complete strangers?
“You don’t do it because you are looking for any kind of acknowledgement, you do it because you want to do it and because you can,” he said.

Rescuetech is an NPO and public benefit organisation that attends to emergency scenes across KZN.
 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY