Durban - Police management believe their latest recruitment drive to re-enlist former officers will bring much-needed skills back to the force.
However, some police officers feel that the move will lead to them being overlooked for promotions. 

At the weekend, police spokesperson Colonel Athlenda Mathe announced they had begun a recruitment drive to re-enlist ex-cops. 
The notice issued at the weekend, and available on the police website, stated that the SAPS welcomed applications from former members with the ranks of constable, sergeant and warrant officer. 
“Successful candidates will only be re-enlisted in the ranks they previously held in the SAPS and remunerated on the minimum salary notch applicable to their rank,” the notice read.

National police spokesperson Brigadier Vish Naidoo said the idea behind the drive was to bring back skilled officers. 
“These members already have the necessary skills and training and it would save us a great deal. 
“We can also benefit from the skills they acquired after they left the force,” he said. 

Speaking to The Mercury, on the basis of anonymity, an officer said the move was unfair. 
“I have been a warrant officer for 19 years and have 29 years of unbroken service. It is sad because in the past I have seen those who re-enlisted basically come back to their old jobs. 
“Why not promote the people with uninterrupted service instead of giving ranks to re-enlistments?” he asked. 

Another officer said he had several friends with uninterrupted service. He said many had more than 30 years while some had between 10 and 20 years of service. 
“These are highly knowledgeable, experienced members who, if used correctly, will gladly take care of their country, but they are being ignored,” he said. 
Naidoo said they had not received any complaints from police-affiliated unions about the drive. 

Popcru spokesperson Richard Mamabolo said the union understood the reasons for the move, but said current officers should not be overlooked.
The Mercury