Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education is “going after” former employees who owe it more than R300 million.
It is not clear how many will be pursued, but it’s known some of the debts are more than three years old.

Most of the debt is said to have been incurred through overpayments.
The report, recently tabled by the Department of Education before members of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa), looked at the debt incurred by ex-employees and stated that an amount of R318m was still owed due to the non-finalisation of collection of these debts. “It must be mentioned that the department is outsourcing the outstanding collection of ex-employee debts to debt-collection agencies,” said the report. 

Scopa members expressed concern that collection agencies might charge more than they were collecting.
“We can state that the terms of collection are such that the collection agency will be paid a percentage of what has been collected,” said a department official. 

DA MPL Francois Rodgers said it was shocking that such a large amount of money could be lost.
“If you overpay someone this month, the next month you must make those deductions. 

“When those employees left, why were the deductions not made before their pensions were paid out? We must question whether this is simply overpayment or something more sinister.
“Why did the employees (processing the over-payments) wait until the liabilities reached such an extent before acting? This is a lot of government money that has been lost.” 

He said even if a debt-collection agency was employed, it was highly doubtful it could recover more than 20% of the money.
IFP MPL and Scopa member Lourens de Klerk said the situation was “terrible”. “This money was supposed to be used on the pupils, but it is being spent in this way. There is a real risk that some of the money might never be recovered.”

The department is also pursuing current employees and undertaking recoveries against several principals and teachers in a separate collection process. This follows a forensic investigation where there were findings of wrongdoing against the officials and it was recommended that recoveries must be made. The full amount to be recovered from them has not been revealed.
The principals are being pursued primarily for financial mismanagement of school funds and teachers found to have used fraudulent qualifications to get jobs are being made to pay back the salaries they earned. 

In one instance in which a principal had been sanctioned, payments amounting to R118100 were made to individuals and were not supported by proof of payment. Cheques amounting to R10400 were issued as cash cheques. 
The principal has been disciplined and a recovery of R124500 is under way. 

In another incident, the department was recovering R216830 from school officials who signed cheques and made payments without proof of payment. 
The Mercury