Durban - A branch of the Shembe church in Thornwood, outside Pinetown, is taking eThekwini Municipality to the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistics Communities (CRL Rights Commission) for demolishing its Vukani temple.
The council said it had demolished the structure last month as it had been built on council land “without permission”.

The CRL Rights Commission said it could not immediately confirm that it had been approached by the church and asked for more time to consult its legal department, which handles such matters.
A letter, with the commission letterhead supplied to The Mercury, shows that an official at the commission’s legal division had acknowledged receipt of the complaint on October 5. 
In a copy of the affidavit seen by The Mercury, a church leader said: “The municipality came to our church on September 13 and destroyed our house which had been built there, without notice and without producing a permit to do so.” 

Wellington Myeni, the chairperson of the Nazareth Judicial Council, said: “The church had been there since around 1988. The church members finally saved about R200000. We started building and just when we were about to put the roof on, the demolition unit came and tore it down.
“We were told DA councillors in the area said the temple had to be demolished and when we asked them, they denied saying that.
“We’ve written to the commission and they have responded,” he said.

DA councillor Marlaine Nair, who was caught up in the issue after another councillor said she had called for the demolition, said the baseless allegations were intended to cause conflict between the DA and the church.
“Congregants of the church described how the city’s land invasion unit officials had used obscenities against the church leader while demolishing the structure,” she said. 
“According to members of the church, they had occupied the area for years without interference because they had received verbal permission from the municipality.” 

She said the church leader did not have written proof of the arrangement and so could not open a case. 
Municipal spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said they demolished the structure as it had been built on council land without permission. 
He said the city was concerned at the rapid rise in land invasion. 

“We are a caring municipality, but we cannot allow lawlessness to prevail. In as much as we recognise and protect human rights, we have an obligation to protect community interests.”
He said land was a scarce resource that needed to be protected for future development. 
 thami.magubane@inl.co.za

The Mercury