Durban - The Development Planning, Environment and Management Unit is on a drive to rid the city of illegal billboards and posters and has appointed a contractor over a three-year period.
The unit’s head, Musa Mbhele, said the appointment was made after an increase in illegal billboards and posters being erected without proper approval or permission from the general advertising branch.

“The unit took a decision by procuring a service provider in compliance with supply chain policy to assist the general advertising branch by removing illegal signs erected without city approval for a three-year period,” he said.
Among the billboards alleged to be illegal were installed last year along the M4 highway and some in the uMhlanga precinct.
The city officials argued that some of the signs were installed without adhering to the by-laws.

The city’s outdoor advertising by-law states that no person may display an outdoor advertising sign or alter an existing outdoor advertising sign, without a permit issued by the municipality. It further stated that an outdoor advertising sign may only be displayed or altered in accordance with conditions imposed in terms of the municipality’s permit.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Mbhele said the advertising branch was reviewing the outdoor advertising by-law which would be announced shortly.
“In this regard, the GAB planned ahead and procured a service provider to remove illegal billboards, hence this function is critical in enforcing by-laws.”

Mbhele said appointing the contractor would assist the branch to be proactive in responding to the removal of illegal signs.
“This is to ensure that business or organisations are given equal opportunity to advertise with due regard to public safety and reasonable standards of appearance that will not degrade or impact the amenities of neighbourhoods,” Mbhele said.
uMhlanga ward councillor Heinz de Boer, who lodged complaints to the city and department of transport, said the city had taken so long to take action against the contractor, and it would cost millions to remove them now.

“Although the city has taken some form of action, the matter is far from over as the contractor has taken the matter to court. This should have been stopped before they even put them up because we did indicate it was against the by-laws”, he said.
De Boer said: “Some were built on solid concrete and they might need cranes to remove them. We will not celebrate at the moment. We will wait until we see the billboards and posters coming down.”AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Sunday Tribune